Transportation Research Part F: Psychology and Behaviour 99 (2023) 374–388
Available online 3 November 2023
1369-8478/© 2023 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
Cyclists ’ perception of streetscape and its influence on route 
choice: A pilot study with a mixed-methods approach 
Roberto Nacxit Ramirez Juarez
a
, Anna Beatriz Grigolon
b , *
, Ana Mafalda Madureira
a 
a
Faculty of Geo-Information & Earth Observation, University of Twente, the Netherlands 
b
Faculty of Engineering Technology, Department of Civil Engineering, University of Twente, the Netherlands   
ARTICLE INFO  
Keywords: 
Cycling 
Route choice 
Streetscape 
Mixed-method 
Virtual Reality 
Eye-tracking 
Travel Behaviour 
ABSTRACT  
To encourage behavioural changes that reduce car use, understanding travel behaviour and in -
terventions in infrastructure are necessary. Understanding the route choices of cyclists and their 
motivation based on their preferences regarding their trip attributes is essential to improve 
cycling infrastructure and encourage active travel modes such as cycling. This research aims to 
explore the influence of streetscape design features (SDFs) on cyclists ’ route choices by devel -
oping a mixed-method approach to collect objective and subjective data from 22 volunteers. We 
used a survey (Maptionnaire) with a virtual reality (VR) and eye-tracking experiment to simulate 
a bicycle trip in Enschede, The Netherlands. Results showed that despite differences between 
usual and ideal routes regarding SDFs (such as the presence of vegetation, water bodies, and road 
intersections), factors such as infrastructure provision and quality have a more significant impact 
when choosing a route. The novelty of the proposed methodology lies in combining data from the 
different methods to improve understanding regarding the influence of SDFs in cyclists ’ route 
choices and raise awareness among the participants about the influence of SDFs on their route 
choices. These results may encourage future studies to develop and implement alternative mixed- 
methods approaches to increase understanding of cyclists ’ travel behaviour. From a practitioner ’ s 
perspective, implementing such mixed-method for data collection may increase the efficiency of 
the process to aid in the development of contextual data-driven interventions that encourage the 
use of bicycles.   
1. Introduction 
Many studies have explored human behaviour in the past to understand the influence of the built environment on travel behaviour 
from socio-economic, spatial and personal perspectives (i.e. Bohte et al., 2009; van Acker et al., 2010 ). Other studies also explored 
travel behaviour concerning travel modes (i.e. Kl ¨ockner & Bl ¨obaum, 2010; Kl ¨ockner & Friedrichsmeier, 2011 ) and route choices (i.e. 
Hardinghaus & Papantoniou, 2020; Segadilha et al., 2014 ). In the case of cyclists ’ route choice behaviour, interaction with the 
environment and its attributes such as dedicated bike lanes, number of crossings, and presence of greenery has shown to be desirable 
and influential when choosing a route to move from one point to another ( Hardinghaus & Papantoniou, 2020; Li et al., 2017 ). 
Therefore, improving the infrastructure with targeted interventions and encouraging bike use requires identifying the elements of the 
* Corresponding author. 
E-mail addresses: r.n.ramirezjuarez@utwente.nl (R.N. Ramirez Juarez), a.b.grigolon@utwente.nl (A.B. Grigolon), m.madureira@utwente.nl 
(A.M. Madureira).  
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Transportation Research Part F:  
Psychology and Behaviour 
journal homep age: www.elsevi er.com/loc ate/trf 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trf.2023.10.029 
Received 13 January 2023; Received in revised form 26 October 2023; Accepted 29 October 2023   Transportation Research Part F: Psychology and Behaviour 99 (2023) 374–388
375
built environment (BE) that influence route choice as part of the cycling experience. 
Previous research has explored the relationship between travel behaviour and the BE. For instance, Cervero & Kockelman (1997) 
identified the “3 D’s” of the BE that encourage active transportation: Density, Diversity, and Design. Also, current research on the 
influence of BE on cyclists’ travel behaviour has continued exploring these variables (Liu et al., 2021; Ospina et al., 2020). However, 
there is a tendency to focus on the density and diversity dimensions while the design is relatively less discussed (Eom & Cho, 2015; 
Wang & Zhou, 2017). The design dimension involves features that reward pedestrians, cyclists or transit riders with the intention of 
’levelling the playing field’ with car drivers (Cervero & Kockelman, 1997). In the case of cycling, the provision of aesthetical amenities 
has been found to be a top motivator for the enjoyment of the cycling experience among users (Winters et al., 2010). In addition, 
aesthetical attributes such as signalised intersections and pavement quality influence the route choice when cycling and are also 
related to convenience and safety factors (Chen et al., 2017). Studies that focus on the relationship between travel behaviour and the 3 
D’s analyse the macro-level of the built environment (i.e. neighbourhood, traffic analysis zone, or census block level). This research 
focuses on the micro-level attributes of the BE to explore their influence on individual travel behaviour. The attention to the micro- 
scale attributes is in line with the findings of Ito & Biljecki (2021) that suggest that street-level indicators (i.e. greenery or building 
design) may have a stronger correlation with bikeability in comparison with macro-level indicators (i.e. density or elevation). Also 
studies such as Harvey et al. (2015), Yang et al. (2021), and Zhou et al. (2022) explore the influence of the micro-level attributes of the 
BE on walking behaviour and safety. Even though these studies focus on walking behaviour, some of the attributes such as greenery 
and diversity of facades can be also related to cycling behaviour. 
To increase understanding of the factors that cyclists consider to choose a route, the differences between the usual and ideal routes 
should be explored. Usual routes are often the shortest path, whereas the ideal routes are not constrained by time or distance, and thus, 
can be significantly longer and more likely to be influenced by other factors such as aesthetic amenities (Winters et al., 2010) together 
with well researched factors such as street connectivity and the presence of cycling paths and facilities (Yang et al., 2019). In previous 
studies (i.e. Ehrgott et al., 2012; Koh & Wong, 2013; Lu et al., 2018), safety and aesthetic conditions such as road intersections, quality 
of pavement, presence of trees and, building design have been considered influential factors for cyclists’ route choices. 
Psychological factors such as the individual’s perception have also greatly influenced cyclists’ travel choices (Willis et al., 2015). 
Perception can be defined as “the way sensory information is organised, interpreted, and consciously experienced” (Spielman et al., 
2020, p.157). Regarding the perception of the BE, objective attributes are often considered more reliable than the perceived, more 
subjective ones (Y. Yang et al., 2019). In the case of cycling behaviour, the influence of both objective and perceived BE has been 
studied. Objective attributes such as street design, traffic speeds and volumes, the density of businesses, etc. have strongly influenced 
travel behaviour as they directly influence the perceptions of the BE (Ma et al., 2014). In this case, data about objective attributes can 
be easily gathered by field audits however, subjective data (perceptions) is often more complex. 
The difficulty in capturing perception lies in the interpretation process of reality. This interpretation of reality can be analysed from 
two main perception approaches, Top-Down and Bottom-Up (Spielman et al., 2020). A Top-Down approach refers to the direct in -
fluence of the physical environment in perception; in other words, how design features such as trees, pavement, facades, etc. and other 
sensory information like smell or sound influence the perception of the environment. A Bottom-Up approach refers to interpreting the 
receiving information based on prior knowledge, experiences and expectations; this means that, in a Bottom-Up approach, the reality is 
processed based on individual preferences and backgrounds. Differentiation between these two approaches would allow the devel -
opment of tools to measure specific types of perception; for example, surveys may help to understand perception from the Bottom-Up 
approach, while a ride-along interview is a Top-Down approach. 
This study aims to contribute to the understanding of the influence of streetscape design features (SDFs) on cyclists’ route choices. 
For this, we develop a mixed-method approach that combines bottom-up and top-down approaches to allow collecting data on cyclists’ 
perception of SDFs and its influence on their route choice behaviour. We explore how information about cyclists’ perception (from 
both top-down and bottom-up approaches) of streetscape design features can be collected and represented for a given context. We then 
assess the added value of the proposed methodology from a user perspective and discuss the extent to which the proposed mixed- 
method approach helps to increase understanding of the impact of SDFs on cyclists’ route choices. Studies that consider both top- 
down and bottom-up approaches to investigate perceptions are common in the fields of neuroscience (e.g. McMains & Kastner, 
2011), psychology (e.g. Gençer & Yıldırım, 2021; Riener, 2019) and, cartography (e.g. Kiefer et al., 2017); however, up to our 
knowledge, there are no studies on the travel behaviour field that combine both approaches as part of their methodology. Hence the 
novelty of the implemented methodology for this study. 
The proposed methodology was applied to the city of Enschede, a medium-sized municipality with about 160 thousand inhabitants 
(Central Bureau of Statistics, 2021) located in the Overijssel region in the east of The Netherlands. In 2020, the city ranked among the 
top-five cycling cities in The Netherlands (Fietsersbond, 2020). Since 2012, the municipality has been working on improving bike- 
commuting movements, where the main focus is providing safety for cyclists and improving the connectivity of the bicycle infra -
structure network (Enschede, 2012). However, to the best of our knowledge, interventions towards improving the aesthetics around 
the infrastructure to improve the riding experience have not been targeted specifically and according to cyclists’ preferences. The 
insights gained from the results of this study can help inform current municipal strategies to encourage cycling behaviour by 
emphasising the design elements of a built environment that improve the cycling experience. 
2. Literature Review: SDFs influencing cyclists’ route choice and data collection approaches 
Cycling is influenced by the provision of infrastructure (such as bike lanes, crossings, etc.) in combination with the perception of 
SDFs of the routes (Desjardins et al., 2021). In this paper, a systematic literature review (section 3.1) was developed to identify the 
R.N. Ramirez Juarez et al.                                                                                                                                                                                           Transportation Research Part F: Psychology and Behaviour 99 (2023) 374–388
376
SDFs that, according to existing literature, influence cyclists’ route choice behaviour, followed by a review of existing methods to 
identify, measure and analyse the influence of SDFs on cyclists’ route choice behaviour. 
Recent studies have focused on which SDFs (such as trees, illumination or window apparels) affect travel choices for non-motorized 
means of transport e.g. Cole-Hunter et al., 2015; Desjardins et al., 2021; Sun et al., 2017; Verhoeven et al., 2018. Also, studies focusing 
specifically on route choice of cyclists and the relationship with the built environment remark the importance of the design dimension 
(aesthetics); an example is the research of Desjardins et al. (2021), where they found that cycling is influenced in a large part by the 
quality, design and connectivity aspects of the infrastructure as participants discussed the perceptions of street-level features more 
than land use or urban form. However, the study did not address what are the specific street-level features that impact the route 
decision. 
To better understand the relationship between SDFs and cycling route choice behaviour, adding a spatial component to the analysis 
may improve understanding of this relationship. For example, previous studies have used bottom-up approaches such as datasets from 
GPS-tracking apps such as STRAVA (McArthur & Hong, 2019) or Hamilton Bike Share (Scott et al., 2021). Via these data collection 
tools, participants first use the GPS app during the cycling activity to record their routes. These GPS routes are combined with sec -
ondary data to find the relationships between the built environment and the recorded routes. 
GPS-tracking apps (i.e. STRAVA) allow researchers to obtain large amounts of data about cycling trips. However, the retrieved data 
from these apps is potentially biased regarding the sample’s representativeness as users of such apps are often cyclists that ride more 
for leisure purposes (Garber et al., 2019). These biases in the data collection could be mitigated by combining multiple datasets to 
improve the sample’s representativeness. One example of this combination of datasets can be found in the work of Alattar et al. (2021), 
where the compensation for missing data from STRAVA was the implementation of a Public Participation Geographic Information 
System (PPGIS) with local STRAVA non-users. 
One example of a PPGIS is the web-based tool Maptionnaire. As a PPGIS, this tool allows researchers to reach out to a broad public 
to collect place-specific data with a customised survey that is designed to fit the specific purposes of the research in a given context and 
allows participants not to only contribute by digitising their routes but also to mark and comment on location-based attributes 
(Maptionnaire, 2020). The possibility of using a tailor-made survey design allows us to compensate for representation biases in the 
dataset and consider other factors such as gender, age or trip purpose in the case of cyclists’ route choice behaviour. 
The development of new technologies generates alternatives to explore an individual’s perception. As an example of a top-down 
approach, Virtual Reality (VR) has been used to replace physical streetscape audits reducing the time taken to complete a visual audit 
compared to a physical audit. In the case of travel behaviour, VR has been used in studies to evaluate pedestrians’ behaviour (Bha -
gavathula et al., 2018; Maghelal et al., 2011) or to evaluate cyclists’ perception of safety (Nazemi et al., 2021). These studies use 
different set-ups such as single or multiple screens, projectors or headsets to simulate the virtual environment. 
For example, Nazemi et al. (2021) used a stationary bike and a 360-degree VR headset to explore five cycling scenarios with 
different bike path characteristics. Even if they do not use the same set-up for the VR experience, these studies highlight the advantages 
of using VR as a reliable tool to capture perception in a safe and controlled environment. This method is found to compensate for 
contextual physical differences such as time of the day, weather conditions, road and traffic characteristics, etc. that may introduce 
variances in the data. 
3. Methods 
In this paper, we propose a mixed-method approach that will allow collecting data on cyclists’ perceptions of SDFs and their in -
fluence on route choice. This approach is guided by the questions, “What are the SDFs that affect route choice of cyclists according to 
literature?” and “How can information about cyclists’ perception (from both top-down and bottom-up approaches) of SDFs be 
collected and represented for a given context?”. 
3.1. Systematic literature review 
First, to identify the SDFs that influence cyclists’ route choice and the latest data collection approaches, we conducted a systematic 
literature review based on peer-reviewed publications from the last 10 years (2011–2021). The key concepts of this research 
(Streetscape, Cycling, Route choice) were searched across three different databases: Scopus, Web of Science and Science Direct. From 
this criteria, two search queries were created: the ’full’ version, which uses Boolean operators and wildcards, and the ’refined’ version, 
Table 1 
Overview of search queries and log used in the systematic literature review.  
Search queries 
Complete (“Aesthetic*” OR “Street design” OR “Streetscap*”) AND (“Cycl*” OR “Non-motor*” OR “Active transport*”) AND (“Route choice*” OR “Travel 
behav*” OR “Path choice*”) 
Refined (“Built environment” OR “Streetscape”) AND (“Cycling”) AND (“Route choice” OR “Path choice”) 
Search log 
Database Query type # Results 
Scopus Full 528 
Web of Science Full 38 
Science Direct Refined 366  
R.N. Ramirez Juarez et al.                                                                                                                                                                                           Transportation Research Part F: Psychology and Behaviour 99 (2023) 374–388
377
which does not incorporates wildcards as some databases do not support such elements or length as part of the query. An overview of 
the used search queries and search logs can be found in Table 1. The search queries provided a total of 932 results where, after scanning 
the methodology and results sections, 57 articles were selected for further analysis. 
The resulting 57 articles were studies that included a list of SDFs and their influence on cycling behaviour as part of their results and 
a detailed explanation of the methods used for data collection. After going through the results of the chosen studies, the SDFs that were 
identified to be of medium or high influence on cycling route choices across most of the articles were listed. To allow simplification of 
the SDFs influencing cyclists’ route choices and to improve the data collection process, three clusters related to the cycling experience 
were created. A list of the clusters and their respective elements is shown in Table 2. 
3.2. Bottom-up approach: Survey 
A survey instrument was developed to retrieve perception data from a bottom-up approach. This survey was designed to explore the 
differences between the participants’ usual and ideal commuting routes with an added spatial element. Exploring the differences 
between the usual and the ideal routes was considered significant as the type of travel plays a role in perception as cycling for transport 
or recreation is associated with different environmental attributes (Heesch et al., 2015). Given these characteristics, the Maptionnaire 
software was considered a good fit as it combines survey questions with an interactive map. 
The survey was divided into six sections: screening, digitising usual and ideal routes, features of the usual and ideal commuting 
routes, attitudes towards cycling, and demographics. The total survey length was 20 questions which took about 20 to 25 min to 
answer. A summary of the sections and respective questions is shown in Table 3. 
The screening section aims to identify the frequency and degree of familiarity that participants have with cycling. The commuting 
and ideal route elicitation sections reveal the perception and pattern discrepancies between both types of routes. During the digiti -
sation of these sections, participants were asked to add observations on specific sections they liked or disliked, which allowed the 
collection of additional information regarding the motivation to choose a specific route to reach the destination. 
The section related to cycling attitudes was based on the cyclist typologies focused on understanding better cycling behaviour 
proposed by Geller, (2006). Geller’s categories are determined by a person’s comfort while riding a bike. The ’fearless’ cyclists will ride 
regardless of roadway conditions and take identity from riding a bike, the ’confident’ ones are comfortable riding on shared roads with 
cars but prefer to operate with their lane, the ’concerned’ cyclists are the ones that like to ride but are afraid to do so regularly because 
of the bike infrastructure, and the ’no way/no how’ are the ones that do not ride a bike for reasons of topography, inabilities or lack of 
motivation or interest in the activity. 
According to Dill & McNeil (2013), there are significant differences in perception of the physical environment among different 
types of cyclists related to safety. To complement the factors that may influence perception, the section about demographics considers 
questions related to age group and education level. 
3.3. Top-down approach: VR & eye-tracking 
A VR experiment was developed to complement the survey to assess the perception of the aesthetical elements during cycling from 
a top-down approach. This experiment combined VR with eye-tracking technology to simulate a bike ride. Combining the results from 
the experiment and the survey allowed a comparison between stated preferences from a bottom-up approach against their reactions to 
a real-time cycling experience from a top-down approach. 
The simulated bike ride was developed using a Tobii VIVE Pro Eye headset coupled with the TobiiProlab software (Tobii Pro AB, 
2014) and a 360-degree camera (INSTA ONE X2) mounted on a helmet to make the recordings of the bike rides. Exposing the par -
ticipants to pre-recorded routes was considered an alternative to avoid external factors such as variability in weather, traffic volumes, 
and speed conditions that may affect the comparison with eye-tracking. 
Table 2 
Clusters of design elements from the chosen literature that influence cyclists’ route choices.  
Cluster (Looking to…) Streetscape Design Feature 
Front Type of cycling lane 
Stop lights 
Amount of intersections 
Foreground Pavement quality 
Surface material 
Bicycle lane width 
Context Parking availability for bikes along the way 
Diversity in building’s facades 
Diversity of land use 
Presence of street-level windows 
Presence of tall buildings 
Presence of trees 
Presence of grass/vegetation 
Presence of landmarks 
Presence of water bodies  
R.N. Ramirez Juarez et al.                                                                                                                                                                                           Transportation Research Part F: Psychology and Behaviour 99 (2023) 374–388
378
The simulations were based on four scenarios retrieved from the liked and disliked sections indicated by participants during the 
survey. The different scenarios are related to the bike ride experience and the aesthetical elements present in each of these segments 
that made most participants rate these sections as Good, Bad, Scenic or Average regarding their preferences during their cycling 
experiences. These section categories are assigned to every road segment based on existing aesthetical elements such as monumental 
buildings, picturesque nature, specific architectonical modern design or a clear horizon without obstructions. Even though rating of 
sections as good, bad, scenic or average can be highly subjective, for the evaluation of this attribute volunteers were encouraged to 
base their grading on the aesthetical factors neglecting personal preferences or particular feelings during their ride regarding the 
infrastructure itself (even surfaces or lane wideness). 
In this case, the Good scenario runs through the city centre, which provides access for pedestrian and cycling traffic and has several 
storefronts on both sides of the path and landmarks (such as the main church) throughout the route. The Bad scenario follows a route 
that has a shared street with cars with a couple of street crossings, stop lights, and a combination of residential and business buildings 
on the sides of the road. The Scenic simulation runs through a park area with medium and tall trees on both sides on a semi-paved 
(gravel) path for pedestrians and cyclists. The Average scenario is a route that follows a long, straight line on a main street with an 
independent bike lane with the presence of greenery, residential buildings and supermarkets, and stop lights. Snapshots of these 
scenarios are presented in Fig. 1. 
By having scenarios that differ in aesthetical quality, a comparison between their responses and their eye movements during the 
same sections was possible. This comparison helped to explore how the behaviour of participants changes between their stated 
preferences and their reaction to the same sections of their routes. Four Areas of Interest (AoI) were established to allow comparison 
between participants’ eye movements. The AoIs were based on clusters of design elements that are influential for cyclists’ route choices 
based on the results from the literature review (Table 2). These clusters of design elements can be translated into the simulation as AoI 
within a 190-degree field of view, as looking behind was not considered meaningful for the experiment. Fig. 2 exemplifies the AoI and 
the considered field of view used for measurements. 
3.4. Added value of the mixed-methods approach 
The assessment of data collection tools involving public participation in terms of their added value and usability is complex, outside 
the quality of the retrieved information. Pelzer et al, (2014) developed a framework to evaluate tools that involve public participation 
at the individual, group and outcome levels. The individual level focuses on the learning effects for the participants involved; the group 
Table 3 
Summary of survey questions.  
Section Question Answer option/action 
Screening How often do you commute by bicycle per week? Never 
1 
2 to 3 
More than 4 
How long have you been living in Enschede? Less than a year 
1 year 
Between 2 and 3 years 
More than 4 years 
Commuting On the map, draw your most common route for commuting to ITC by bike. Drawing polyline 
Ideal Imagine you do not have any time or distance constraints. Draw your ideal route for commuting to 
ITC by bike 
Drawing polyline 
Commuting/ 
Ideal 
From your route, indicate which sections you like the most (and why). Drawing line 
From your route, indicate which sections you dislike the most (and why). Drawing line 
Add a marker of the things you like about this route. Adding point 
Add a marker of the things you dislike about this route. Adding point 
From the following list, which design attributes do you consider important for choosing this route? List of SDFs (see Table 2) 
From the following factors, which ones do you consider for choosing this route? Shortest route 
Fastest route 
Low motorised traffic volume 
High pedestrian traffic volumeSlope  
(inclination) 
Traffic safety 
Attributes In terms of safety, to which of the following typologies do you relate your cycling behaviour? Very comfortable even without bike 
lanes 
Somewhat comfortable while in bike 
lanes 
Not very comfortable while on bike 
lanes 
Very uncomfortable even in bike lanes 
Demographics What is your age? Open question 
Which of these categories applies to you? I am working 
I am studying 
I am working & studying  
R.N. Ramirez Juarez et al.                                                                                                                                                                                           Transportation Research Part F: Psychology and Behaviour 99 (2023) 374–388
379
Fig. 1. Snapshots of different scenarios that were used for the experiment.  
Fig. 2. Virtual Reality environment with AOIs and field of view.  
R.N. Ramirez Juarez et al.                                                                                                                                                                                           Transportation Research Part F: Psychology and Behaviour 99 (2023) 374–388
380
level involves the exchange of information, collaboration and efficiency of the tool, and the outcome level considers the extent to 
which the tool influences the decision resulting from a participatory planning process. 
In the case of tools intended for data collection, evaluating certain variables from the individual, group and outcome levels may 
provide insight into the added value of the tool, allowing the identification of potential uses and limitations of such tool for decision- 
making processes. An overview of the evaluation of participatory tools based on Pelzer et al., (2014) framework is illustrated in Fig. 3 . 
4. Data collection 
Participants were recruited to test the implementation of this mixed-method approach to increase understanding of the influence of 
SDFs on cyclists ’ route choices. These participants were chosen based on five criteria: familiarity, common destination, demographics, 
language, and physical conditions. Familiarity relates to participants that are familiar with the activity of commuting by bicycle and 
that are used to the local context. Familiarity with the context allows participants to focus more on the experiences and perceptions of 
the scenery while cycling ( Desjardins et al., 2021 ). A common destination among participants was considered to reveal the differences 
between the usual and ideal route. The common destination was the Faculty of Geo-Information Science and Earth Information (ITC) 
from the University of Twente (Enschede, The Netherlands) located within the study area in a relatively central location. 
To reach out to participants, the institutional e-mail and WhatsApp social network among ITC staff and students were used for two 
weeks, resulting in a total of 22 respondents for the study. As the available time for research in a simulator is usually restricted, the 
number of participants involving a simulator experiment is rather limited ( Kircher, 2007 ). Similar studies involving eye-tracking 
technology (eg. Giannopoulos et al., 2015; Popelka & Dolez ˘alov ´a, 2015; Schwarzkopf et al., 2016 ) contemplate sample sizes below 
40 participants therefore, the sample size was considered enough to reveal a secure variety of information throughout the study area 
without saturating the dataset due to the size of the study area and the common destination. Also, due to the availability of a single VR 
headset and sanitary regulations (i.e. scheduling appointments to use the lab and no more than two people in the room), a large 
quantity of subjects could not be supported. Finally, to ensure safety, as the experiment phase involved participants using VR tech -
nology, people who suffered from motion sickness were screened out. 
4.1. Evaluation of added value (post-survey) 
We were interested in understanding to what extent the proposed mixed-method approach helps researchers to increase under -
standing about the impact of SDFs on cyclists ’ route choices. All participants were requested to fill out a post-study questionnaire to 
support the identification of the added value of the implemented methods from a user perspective. However, of all participants, only 10 
out of 22 agreed to fill out the questionnaire. This questionnaire aimed to gain insights about learning from the experience and the 
usability of the implemented tools. The survey used a Likert scale (1 to 5) to allow comparison between tools. A summary of the survey 
is presented in Table 4 , and the same questions were asked for both the survey and the VR experiment. 
The section on Learning is intended to uncover the degree of reflection and awareness that participants gained after participating in 
the study and how the experience may have influenced their route choices or what they focus their attention on while cycling. The 
Usability section ’ s questions are intended to assess the variables regarding using these tools in a public participation process. The 
questions are based on Pelzer et al., (2016) usability variables to evaluate planning support systems: transparency of information, 
communicative value, user-friendliness, level of detail, and integrality ( Table 5 ). These variables were chosen as they may give insight 
into the possible flaws in the survey design and the experiment. 
Fig. 3. Illustration about the added value of tools involving public participation based on the framework developed by Pelzer et al, (2014) .  
R.N. Ramirez Juarez et al.                                                                                                                                                                                           Transportation Research Part F: Psychology and Behaviour 99 (2023) 374–388
381
5. Results 
5.1. Maptionnaire survey 
Regarding the individual characteristics of the collected responses from the 22 participants, the variability among the subjects’ 
backgrounds was considered a positive influence as the sample would be able to represent perceptions from different ages and cultural 
backgrounds. Participants included staff and ITC faculty students with different ages and cultural backgrounds. However, due to the 
characteristics of the destination environment (a Higher Education institution) most participants had at least a bachelor’s degree. 
Half of the participants in the survey were students, and the rest were a mix of staff members and staff that is also studying (PhD 
candidates). From the sample, 14 people reported commuting by bike to work at least four times a week. This tendency suggests that 
participants strongly prefer using the bicycle as a transport mode for commuting. Also, there was a relationship between the time 
participants have been living in the city and the number of times that they commute by bike where more than half of the participants 
that were living for a year in the city (5 out of 9), used the bike more than four times a week, and 5 out of 6 people that has been living 
in the city for more than 4 years uses the bike with the same frequency. However, the sample size, context and recruitment strategy 
strongly affected the relationship between time spent living in the city and the cycling frequency. 
The Maptionnaire survey also retrieved participants’ perceptions of streetscape features and their influence on usual and ideal 
commuting routes. The survey provided insights from a bottom-up approach about cycling behaviour, perception of SDFs and stated 
preferences along the routes based on participants’ previous experiences. Having the routes reported in a map allowed the selection of 
the four scenarios for the VR experiment making a comparison of perceptions from a top-down approach possible. 
Differences regarding the streetscape design elements between the usual and the ideal commuting route were analysed, as shown in 
Table 6. Stated preferences for both routes such as pavement quality, adequate surface material and cycling lane width influencing 
route choices are in line with the findings of other authors (Cole-Hunter et al., 2015; Desjardins et al., 2021; Verhoeven et al., 2018) 
that suggest that even though aesthetical elements have an impact on the enjoyability of the ride, the provision of infrastructure and its 
quality are preferred when cyclists choose a route. 
The main differences between the usual and the ideal route (Table 6) were found regarding the presence of road intersections, 
vegetation or water bodies, and avoidance of stop lights. Regarding preferences regarding ’stop lights avoidance’ and ’least amount of 
road intersections’, the results suggest that participants tend to be more time-efficient when choosing their usual route. This tendency 
is also supported by the stated preference in the survey, where 17 participants considered the ’fastest route’ factor on their usual 
commuting route, against three respondents considering the ’fastest route’ factor on their ideal route. 
Regarding the preferences for aesthetical features, participants reported a higher preference for trees and vegetation in their ideal 
route than their usual route. Also, the preference for the diversity of land use was more significant in the ideal routes from participants. 
Results suggest that participants prioritise aesthetical factors when the time or distance constraints are not present. This result aligns 
with Winters et al., (2010) who found aesthetical amenities to be a top motivator for enjoying the cycling experience. However, 
regarding the degree of influence these elements may have when choosing a route, avoidance of stop lights and pavement quality may 
have the most significant impact. This influence is supported by the findings of Lu et al., (2018) and Ospina et al., (2020) where 
although cyclists consider factors such as vegetation and water bodies as a positive attribute, more weight is given to distance and 
travel times when choosing their commuting routes. 
Also, we analyse the dataset using a point-biserial correlation (Spearman’s rho) to look for the connections between characteristics 
Table 4 
Learning and usability survey for assessment of the added value of tools.  
Section Question 
Learning My attention to my surroundings increased when cycling.I think more about the reasons for choosing my commuting  
route.My  
preferences and criteria to choose my commuting route have changed. 
Usability The information and variables presented (definitions/video clips) were understandable to me.The visual (video/pictures/icons) and spatial (maps/ 
landmarks)  
information were accordingly represented. 
I was able to use the tool without any inconvenience. 
The level of detail of the tool allowed me to provide a real answer to the questions.The tool allowed me to share my opinions about what I find 
interesting (attention)  
about a route when cycling.  
Table 5 
Definition of usability variables based on Pelzer et al (2016) framework to evaluate tools involving public participation.  
Variable Definition 
Transparency The extent to which the underlying information and variables used in the tool are accessible and understandable to users. 
Communicative value The extent to which spatial/visual information is aptly presented. 
User-friendliness The extent to which participants are able to use the tool themselves. 
Level of detail The extent to which the level of detail of the tool matches the perspective of participants. 
Integrality The extent to which the tool takes all the relevant dimensions into account.  
R.N. Ramirez Juarez et al.                                                                                                                                                                                           Transportation Research Part F: Psychology and Behaviour 99 (2023) 374–388
382
of the participants (i.e. cycling frequency, familiarity, and cycling behaviour) and the SDFs. The point-biserial correlation denoted to 
be the best fit for the dataset as the survey considered binary values to state the SDFs preferences for both usual and ideal routes and 
Spearman ’ s correlation coefficients were chosen over Pearson ’ s as Spearman ’ s can evaluate a monotonic relationship within two 
variables (continuous or ordinal) rather than on a linear relationship such as in the case of Pearson ’ s. From the results ( Table 6 ), street- 
level windows and tall buildings show a negative correlation with the cycling frequency; this means that from the sample, the more 
people cycled per week the less likely they were to consider the presence of street-level windows and tall buildings to choose their ideal 
route. 
For the case of the relationships of SDFs and the familiarity of the participants with the study area, results show that in the case of 
the usual route, participants that are more familiar with the area have more tendency to choose a route that avoids the most stop lights 
(positive correlation) but are less likely to consider the wideness of the cycling lane (negative correlation). In the case of the ideal route, 
participants that have more familiarity with the area tend to prefer the presence of grass or vegetation when considering their cycling 
routes as supported by the positive correlation. From the characteristics of participants, age and occupation are not shown in Table 6 as 
they did not show any meaningful correlation with SDFs. 
With regard to the correlations between the confidence of participants while cycling (cycling behaviour typology) and SDFs, results 
show that there is a negative correlation with the diversity of land use and the presence of vegetation, water bodies and landmarks 
when choosing their usual route. This relationship means that participants with a higher confidence while riding have the tendency to 
not consider these SDFs when choosing their usual route. From the characteristics of participants, age and occupation are not shown in 
Table 6 as they did not show any meaningful correlation with SDFs. 
5.2. VR experiment: Influence of SDFs on cyclists ’ perception 
To allow comparison of results within the AoI of the different scenarios from the VR experiment, the recorded measurements for 
both fixation time and number of saccades were standardised ( U
v
) ranging from 0 to 1 using a min – max interval formula (equation 1). 
This resulting score follows a benefit criterion, meaning that the highest the value (closer to 1) the highest the fixation time or the 
number of saccades registered. The resulting values are shown in Table 7 . 
U
v
=
value   lowestvalue
highestvalue   lowestvalue  
Equation 1. Min-max interval formula for standardised values. 
Table 6 
Counts of SDFs preferences for usual and ideal routes with respective Spearman ’ s rho correlation values. Values with * and ** are significant at the 
0.05 level and 0.01 (2-tailed) respectively.  
SDFs Usual 
route 
count 
Ideal 
route 
count 
Times cycling per week (Usual/ 
Ideal) 
Time living in study area 
(Usual/Ideal) 
Confidence when 
cycling 
(Usual/Ideal) 
Pavement quality 14 12 – – – 
Adequate surface material 12 12 – – – 
Wide cycling lane 8 10 – (-0.571**/ -) – 
Independent cycling lane 9 8 – – – 
Parking availability 1 1 – – – 
Diversity of building ’ s facades 6 5 – – – 
Diversity of land use 3 7 – – (-0.610**/ -) 
Street-level windows 3 2 (- /-0.469*) – – 
Tall buildings – 2 (- /-0.469*) – – 
Trees 6 12 – – – 
Grass/vegetation 3 9 – (- /0.489*) (-0.610**/ -) 
Landmarks 5 3 – – (-0.472*/ -) 
Water bodies 3 8 – – (-0.610**/ -) 
Stop light avoidance 14 9 – (0.444*/ -) – 
Least amount of road 
intersections 
10 8 – – –  
Table 7 
Standardised values for fixations and saccades based on the min (0/0) and max (77,608/169) values across scenarios.   
Front Foreground Context R Context L 
Scenario Fixation Saccades Fixation Saccades Fixation Saccades Fixation Saccades 
Bad  0.55  0.29  0.06  0.04  0.34  0.26  0.41  0.35 
Average  0.70  0.33  0.04  0.02  0.38  0.27  0.25  0.17 
Good  0.48  0.23  0.04  0.02  0.34  0.28  0.25  0.19 
Scenic  0.37  0.16  0.02  0.01  0.45  0.38  0.38  0.33 
Note: Standardised values are based on the average value for each of the measurements registered by participants (n = 22). 
R.N. Ramirez Juarez et al.                                                                                                                                                                                           Transportation Research Part F: Psychology and Behaviour 99 (2023) 374–388
383
To improve the comparison between AoI across different scenarios, Fig. 4 illustrates in the form of a heat map the fixation times 
(red > 5 s) during the whole simulation (2 min per scenario) with an underlay of the AoI (magenta, blue, and yellow). The resulting 
shape of the heat maps reveals the patterns of participants ’ behaviour during the whole simulation for each scenario. 
Similarities between the ’ bad ’ and the ’ scenic ’ shapes suggest that participants focused their attention on the front most of the time 
but also explored the context to both sides, as the horizontal shape of the heat map suggests. However, differences are spotted in the 
fixation scores. In the case of the ’ bad ’ scenario, fixations to the front scored 0.55 against 0.37 in the ’ scenic ’ , meaning that participants 
paid more attention to the front in the ’ bad ’ than the ’ scenic ’ scenario. The similarities in behaviour between a ’ bad ’ and a ’ scenic ’ 
scenario suggest that the diversity of the scenery is not as influential as the specific features that a route has for specific sections to be 
categorised as boring or picturesque. This may happen as an environment with multiple buildings can be categorised as “ boring ” . In 
contrast, a diverse path with different trees along the way may be categorised as “ picturesque ” even though both scenarios provide 
diversity. 
Regarding the distribution of fixations represented for the ’ average ’ scenario, the compact shape suggests that participants spent 
the most time looking to the front compared to other scenarios. This is also supported by the fixation score of the ’ good ’ scenario as it 
scored the highest (0.70) compared to the other scenarios. This focus in the centre suggests that participants were not as interested in 
the context of average scenarios. Even though the ’ average ’ scenario results regarding the context AOIs are very similar to the ’ good ’ 
scenario regarding fixation (0.38, 0.25/0.34, 0.25) and saccades (0.27, 0.17/0.28, 0.19), differences are more understandable when 
comparing the fixation scores to the front AOI as the fixation score of the ’ good ’ scenario (0.48) was smaller. This suggests that the 
motivation to rate between an average and a good scenario for participants may be the presence of ephemeral distractors such as the 
presence of pedestrians along the way. 
5.3. Evaluation of the added value of the mixed-methods approach 
The results from the added value survey are summarised in Fig. 5 , differentiating both the Maptionnaire survey (MP) and the VR 
experiment (VR), scores in terms of learning and usability. 
In terms of Learning, participants reported similar evaluations for both tools, suggesting that both have a similar potential to in -
crease their users ’ awareness about how the experience may have influenced their route choices or what their attention is on while 
Fig. 4. Heatmaps of the bike ride scenarios with respective AOIs.  
R.N. Ramirez Juarez et al.                                                                                                                                                                                           Transportation Research Part F: Psychology and Behaviour 99 (2023) 374–388
384
cycling. Even though the distribution of responses for both tools suggests a tendency for participants to be more aware of their reasons 
for choosing their commuting routes after using the tool, the use of the tool does not seem to have influenced as much the behaviour of 
participants while cycling. This means that after participating in the study, participants may present an increased awareness about how 
the design features of the streetscape influence their route choices but, it would probably not change the aspects they focus their 
attention on while cycling. 
Regarding the change in criteria when choosing their commuting routes, results suggest that even though they may be more aware 
of how the SDFs play a role, there is a high chance for participants to keep their usual routes, which suggests that other factors such as 
distance or travel times may have a larger influence on their route choices. This behaviour is in line with studies that discovered that 
travel distances in cyclists ’ route choices are highly influential ( Lu et al., 2018; Ospina et al., 2020 ). 
As to the Usability of the implemented data collection tools, most participants reported very positive feedback about the ease of 
using both tools. This positive feedback suggests that both tools may increase the efficiency of collecting data considering larger 
samples. The representation of information for both tools was perceived positively, with a slight difference in the degree of under -
standing of variables involved where the Maptionnaire tool seems to have been more successful to represent the variables over the VR 
environment, even though both tools were reported to have the same level of detail. However, the VR tool seems to better capture the 
opinions about what participants find interesting about a cycling route. This output may be due to the eye-tracking capabilities 
involved in the VR experiment, which allows us to answer the question ’ What do I find interesting while cycling? ’ in a more dynamic 
way for participants and without much effort. 
6. Discussion 
Regarding the influence of SDFs on cyclists ’ route choices, participants reported considerable differences between their usual and 
ideal commuting routes ( section 5.1 ) where preferences towards avoidance of stop lights and good pavement quality were predom -
inant in the usual routes against the preference for the presence of trees, vegetation, water bodies, and diversity of land uses in the ideal 
commuting routes. These preferences were also supported by the results from the eye-tracking measurements ( section 5.2 ), where 
participants reported larger fixation times and saccades looking at the context in the ’ scenic ’ scenario, meaning that they spent most of 
their time looking and exploring their surroundings that involved vegetation and trees along the way. In contrast, for the average 
scenario participants registered a larger fixation time looking to the front to elements such as crossings and stop lights. 
These findings align with Winters et al. (2010) , who also found that aesthetic amenities were influential in the enjoyment of the 
cycling experience. However, when it comes to the degree of influence that these elements may have when choosing a route, avoidance 
of stop lights and the quality of pavement may have the largest impact. This influence is supported by the findings of Lu et al., (2018) 
and Ospina et al., (2020) where although cyclists consider factors such as vegetation and water bodies as a positive attribute, more 
Fig. 5. Distribution of responses about learning and usability of the data collection tools.  
R.N. Ramirez Juarez et al.                                                                                                                                                                                           Transportation Research Part F: Psychology and Behaviour 99 (2023) 374–388
385
weight is given to distance and travel times when choosing their commuting routes. 
About the proposed methodology, mixing the results from both the survey and the VR experiment allowed us to gain more detailed 
information about how participants perceive SDFs and how they interact with them while cycling. The insights about the influence of 
SDFs in cyclists’ route choices were supported on the one hand, by the survey that allowed us to explore the rationale of participants to 
choose their routes and help explain why they would categorise sections of their routes as ’bad’ or ’beautiful’. This input provided 
subjective data from a bottom-up approach allowing us to analyse the influence of SDFs on their route choices, which may help 
understand the reasoning behind cyclists’ route selection. On the other hand, the simulated bike ride and the measurement of par -
ticipants’ eye movements allow an understanding of how SDFs influence the perception in real-time (top-down approach) when 
cycling. These measurements allowed us to analyse participants’ attention to design features and generate insights regarding how these 
may influence the overall riding experience in a given context. 
The mixed-method approach of this study brings added value at the group and output levels. From the group level, the main 
advantage of using a mixed-method approach is that combining different methods allows for compensation in performance from each 
other in terms of efficiency, as the Maptionnaire survey seems to be better at enabling the exchange of information and collaboration 
among participants. In contrast, the VR and the eye-tracking experiment seem more efficient at providing deeper insights from a top- 
down approach. This means that using the combined methods may improve the efficiency of capturing data about cyclists’ perceptions 
of SDFs without jeopardising the capabilities to reach a consensus and exchange information among participants to reach consensus. 
As for the output level, the advantages of the proposed methodology can be seen in terms of the potential of the collected data for an 
improved understanding of the influence of SDFs in cyclists’ route choices. The combination of eye-tracking measurements from 
certain sections with the responses from the survey allowed us to reflect upon the possible reasons to rate sections of the participants’ 
routes as ’good’ or ’bad’. This means that merging the results from different tools increases the chance to understand better how 
cyclists interact with the SDFs and how these influence their perceptions and choices when cycling. 
7. Conclusions 
Understanding the route choices of cyclists and their motivation based on their preferences is important to improve cycling net -
works and encourage the use of active travel modes such as cycling. In this study, a mixed-method approach (a combination of bottom- 
up & top-down approaches and a final evaluation) was developed to understand the influence of SDFs on cyclists’ route choices. 
Even though several studies address perceptions using similar tools to identify the design elements (i.e. Alattar et al., 2021; Nazemi 
et al., 2021), they often focus on one type of perception rather bottom-up or top-down with the use of surveys, interviews, or analytical 
models. However, this study’s findings suggest that combining different methods may improve the understanding of how cyclists 
interact and are influenced by the already identified SDFs. 
Due to the opposite nature of the bottom-up and top-down approaches for the observation of perception, using a mixed-method 
approach was considered appropriate as the combination of results from both perspectives allowed us to further understand how 
the SDFs influence the cycling experience. The survey allowed us to explore the reasoning of participants to choose their routes and 
explore the rationale to consider sections of their routes as ’bad or boring’ or ’beautiful’. This type of comment allows one to un -
derstand the influence of the design features based on their personal experiences, which may be useful to further understand the 
reasoning behind route selection from a top-down approach. A simulated bike ride and the measurement of participants’ eye 
movements allowed us to understand how SDFs influence the perception in real-time when cycling. These measurements allow us to 
analyse the attention of participants to design features and how these may influence the overall riding experience in a given context 
from a top-down approach. 
The combination of these two methods to collect data about the perception of SDFs allowed us to contextualise the retrieved in -
formation as data from sections within the study area was collected from participants that were familiar with the environment. This 
familiarity aspect allowed focusing the attention on the enjoyability of the ride when participating in the VR experiment and 
consequently, after mixing results from both methods, gain detailed information about how participants perceive SDFs and how they 
interact with them when cycling. Therefore, this approach may be valuable to address targeted interventions or to receive feedback 
from participants about a specific context from both their previous experiences and their interaction in real-time with the environment. 
This study contributes to existing literature regarding the influence of SDFs on cycling behaviours as our findings suggest cyclists 
tend to focus their attention on diverse and changing environments while cycling. This means that participants reported a preference 
for design features that enhanced the aesthetics of their routes such as trees, diverse facades, presence of vegetation and water bodies. 
However, these preferences may just influence the enjoyability of the ride but would not have more importance over shorter travel 
times when it comes to commuting. These revealed preferences may be also useful for decision-makers to develop interventions of 
infrastructure to reward cyclists and therefore encourage the use of the bicycle in specific urban environments. 
According to the evaluation of the added value of the mixed-method approach, participants showed an increased level of awareness 
about the reasons to choose their commuting routes. However, this increase in awareness seems not to have influenced the preferences 
or criteria of participants to change their routes after participating in the study. This means that after participating in the study, 
participants reflected on their responses and the way they interact with their surroundings when cycling. This potential for increasing 
understanding from the mixed-method approach may be useful for decision-makers and researchers to gain insight into specific in -
terventions regarding SDFs or to improve the cycling infrastructure from a data-driven perspective. 
Additional advantages of the implementation of the mixed-method approach can be found in the potential of the collected data to 
improve understanding of the influence of SDFs in cyclists’ route choices. The increased potential may be due to the combination of 
eye-tracking measurements from certain road sections and the responses from the survey which allow reflection upon the reasoning to 
R.N. Ramirez Juarez et al.                                                                                                                                                                                           Transportation Research Part F: Psychology and Behaviour 99 (2023) 374–388
386
rate sections as ’ good ’ or ’ boring ’ . This means that, by merging the results from different tools, there is an increasing chance to better 
understand how cyclists interact with the SDFs and how these influence their perceptions and choices when cycling. 
This study has limitations that might be useful for future research. Regarding technical limitations, several trade-offs had to be 
considered when developing the VR experiment that may have influenced the behaviour and eye movements of participants. Con -
siderations about processing power, more stable software and quality of video clips (higher resolution, frames per second and bit rates) 
could impact the experience of participants as the stimuli would feel more natural and immersive, allowing for better measurements of 
their attention to AOIs during the simulation of a bike ride. 
Additionally, limitations in the case of the research design involve the consideration of a larger and more diverse sample size for 
both the survey and the experiment. This diversity may be introduced by not considering a single common destination but an area such 
as the city centre to retrieve more information about the bicycle infrastructure of the whole study area from inhabitants and visitors. 
Also, introduces more possibilities to comment on specific SDFs that may have been left out from the literature that was used in this 
study, as these missing elements may have an influence when choosing a route. 
This paper addresses the difficulty to capture perceptions by considering both the bottom-up and top-down approaches to improve 
the interpretation of the retrieved information and discusses the advantages and limitations of the proposed mixed-methods approach. 
Results from this study may encourage future studies to develop and implement alternative mixed-methods approaches to increase 
understanding of cyclists ’ travel behaviour regarding route choice. Also from a practitioner ’ s perspective, implementation of such 
mixed methods for data collection may increase the efficiency of the process and also help to develop contextual data-driven in -
terventions that aim to encourage the use of bicycles. 
CRediT authorship contribution statement 
Roberto Nacxit Ramirez Juarez: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, Formal analysis, Investigation, Resources, Data 
curation, Writing – original draft. Anna Beatriz Grigolon: Conceptualization, Methodology, Validation, Resources, Writing – review 
& editing, Supervision, Project administration. Ana Mafalda Madureira: Conceptualization, Methodology, Validation, Resources, 
Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Project administration. 
Declaration of Competing Interest 
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to 
influence the work reported in this paper. 
Data availability 
Data will be made available on request. 
Acknowledgements 
This work is derived from an MSc thesis supported by the ITC Excellence scholarship from the Faculty of Geo-information Science 
and Earth Observation at the University of Twente, The Netherlands. 
References 
Alattar, M. A., Cottrill, C., & Beecroft, M. (2021). Public participation geographic information system (PPGIS) as a method for active travel data acquisition. Journal of 
Transport Geography, 96 , Article 103180. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JTRANGEO.2021.103180 
Bhagavathula, R., Williams, B., Owens, J., & Gibbons, R. (2018). The reality of virtual reality: A comparison of pedestrian behavior in real and virtual environments. 
Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society, 3 , 2056 – 2060. https://doi.org/10.1177/1541931218621464 
Bohte, W., Maat, K., & van Wee, B. (2009). Measuring Attitudes in Research on Residential Self-Selection and Travel Behaviour: A Review of Theories and Empirical 
Research. Transport Reviews, 29 (3), 325 – 357. https://doi.org/10.1080/01441640902808441 
Central Bureau of Statistics. (2021). Regional key figures The Netherlands . Regional Key Figures .  
Cervero, R., & Kockelman, K. (1997). Travel demand and the 3Ds: Density, diversity, and design. Transportation Research Part D: Transport and Environment, 2 (3), 
199 – 219. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1361-9209(97)00009-6 
Chen, P., Shen, Q., & Childress, S. (2017). A GPS data-based analysis of built environment influences on bicyclist route preferences. International Journal of Sustainable 
Transportation, 12 (3), 218 – 231. https://doi.org/10.1080/15568318.2017.1349222 
Cole-Hunter, T., Donaire-Gonzalez, D., Curto, A., Ambros, A., Valentin, A., Garcia-Aymerich, J., … Nieuwenhuijsen, M. (2015). Objective correlates and determinants 
of bicycle commuting propensity in an urban environment. Transportation Research Part D: Transport and Environment, 40 , 132 – 143. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
trd.2015.07.004 
Desjardins, E., Apatu, E., Razavi, S. D., Higgins, C. D., Scott, D. M., & P ´aez, A. (2021). “ Going through a little bit of growing pains ” : A qualitative study of the factors 
that influence the route choice of regular bicyclists in a developing cycling city. Transportation Research Part F: Traffic Psychology and Behaviour, 81 , 431 – 444. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.TRF.2021.06.005 
Desjardins, E., Higgins, C. D., Scott, D. M., Apatu, E., & P ´aez, A. (2021). Using environmental audits and photo-journeys to compare objective attributes and bicyclists ’ 
perceptions of bicycle routes. Journal of Transport & Health, 22 , Article 101092. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JTH.2021.101092 
Dill, J., & McNeil, N. (2013). Four Types of Cyclists?: Examination of Typology for Better Understanding of Bicycling Behavior and Potential. Transportation Research 
Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board, 2387 (2387), 129 – 138. https://doi.org/10.3141/2387-15 
Ehrgott, M., Wang, J. Y. T., Raith, A., & Van Houtte, C. (2012). A bi-objective cyclist route choice model. Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice, 46 (4), 
652 – 663. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.TRA.2011.11.015 
Enschede, M. of. (2012). Enschede Fietsstad 2020 . 
R.N. Ramirez Juarez et al.                                                                                                                                                                                           Transportation Research Part F: Psychology and Behaviour 99 (2023) 374–388
387
Eom, H. J., & Cho, G. H. (2015). Exploring thresholds of built environment characteristics for walkable communities: Empirical evidence from the Seoul Metropolitan 
area. Transportation Research Part D: Transport and Environment, 40 , 76 – 86. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trd.2015.07.005 
Fietsersbond. (2020). Fietsstad 2020: dit is de top 5 . Nieuws. 
Garber, M. D., Watkins, K. E., & Kramer, M. R. (2019). Comparing bicyclists who use smartphone apps to record rides with those who do not: Implications for 
representativeness and selection bias. Journal of Transport & Health, 15 , Article 100661. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JTH.2019.100661 
Geller, R. (2006). Four Types of Transportation Cyclists. Portland Bureau of . Transportation . 
Gençer, E., & Yıldırım, Z. (2021). Top-Down Processing. Encyclopedia of Animal Cognition and Behavior, 1 – 8 . https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-47829-6_1832-1 
Giannopoulos, I., Kiefer, P., & Raubal, M. (2015). Gaze nav: Gaze-based pedestrian navigation. MobileHCI 2015 - Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on 
Human-Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices and Services , 337 – 346. 10.1145/2785830.2785873. 
Hardinghaus, M., & Papantoniou, P. (2020). Evaluating Cyclists ’ Route Preferences with Respect to Infrastructure. Sustainability 2020, Vol. 12, Page 3375 , 12 (8), 3375. 
10.3390/SU12083375. 
Harvey, C., Aultman-Hall, L., Hurley, S. E., & Troy, A. (2015). Effects of skeletal streetscape design on perceived safety. Landscape and Urban Planning, 142 , 18 – 28. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.LANDURBPLAN.2015.05.007 
Heesch, K. C., Giles-Corti, B., & Turrell, G. (2015). Cycling for transport and recreation: Associations with the socio-economic, natural and built environment. Health & 
Place, 36 , 152 – 161. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.HEALTHPLACE.2015.10.004 
Ito, K., & Biljecki, F. (2021). Assessing bikeability with street view imagery and computer vision. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies, 132 , Article 
103371. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.TRC.2021.103371 
Kiefer, P., Giannopoulos, I., Raubal, M., & Duchowski, A. (2017). Eye tracking for spatial research: Cognition, computation, challenges. Spatial Cognition & 
Computation, 17 (1 – 2), 1 – 19. https://doi.org/10.1080/13875868.2016.1254634 
Kircher, K. (2007). Driver distraction : a review of the literature . Statens v ¨ag- och transportforskningsinstitut. https://urn.kb.se/resolve?urn = urn:nbn:se:vti:diva-6451. 
Kl ¨ockner, C. A., & Bl ¨obaum, A. (2010). A comprehensive action determination model: Toward a broader understanding of ecological behaviour using the example of 
travel mode choice. Journal of Environmental Psychology, 30 (4), 574 – 586. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JENVP.2010.03.001 
Kl ¨ockner, C. A., & Friedrichsmeier, T. (2011). A multi-level approach to travel mode choice – How person characteristics and situation specific aspects determine car 
use in a student sample. Transportation Research Part F: Traffic Psychology and Behaviour, 14 (4), 261 – 277. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.TRF.2011.01.006 
Koh, P. P., & Wong, Y. D. (2013). Influence of infrastructural compatibility factors on walking and cycling route choices. Journal of Environmental Psychology, 36 , 
202 – 213. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JENVP.2013.08.001 
Li, S., Muresan, M., & Fu, L. (2017). Cycling in Toronto, Ontario, Canada: Route Choice Behavior and Implications for Infrastructure Planning. Transportation Research 
Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board, 2662 (1), 41 – 49. https://doi.org/10.3141/2662-05 
Liu, L., Silva, E. A., & Yang, Z. (2021). Similar outcomes, different paths: Tracing the relationship between neighborhood-scale built environment and travel behavior 
using activity-based modelling. Cities, 110 , Article 103061. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cities.2020.103061 
Lu, W., Scott, D. M., & Dalumpines, R. (2018). Understanding bike share cyclist route choice using GPS data: Comparing dominant routes and shortest paths. Journal of 
Transport Geography, 71 , 172 – 181. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JTRANGEO.2018.07.012 
Ma, L., Dill, J., & Mohr, C. (2014). The objective versus the perceived environment: what matters for bicycling? Transportation 2014 41:6 , 41 (6), 1135 – 1152. 10.1007/ 
S11116-014-9520-Y. 
Maghelal, P., Natesan, P., Naderi, J. R., & Kweon, B. S. (2011). Investigating the use of virtual reality for pedestrian environments. Journal of Architectural and Planning 
Research, 28 (2), 104 – 117 . 
Maptionnaire. (2020, January). 4 Benefits of PPGIS for Transportation and Mobility Planning . Maptionnarie Blog. 
McArthur, D. P., & Hong, J. (2019). Visualising where commuting cyclists travel using crowdsourced data. Journal of Transport Geography, 74 , 233 – 241. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/J.JTRANGEO.2018.11.018 
McMains, S., & Kastner, S. (2011). Interactions of Top-Down and Bottom-Up Mechanisms in Human Visual Cortex. The Journal of Neuroscience, 31 (2), 587. https://doi. 
org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3766-10.2011 
Nazemi, M., van Eggermond, M. A. B., Erath, A., Schaffner, D., Joos, M., & Axhausen, K. W. (2021). Studying bicyclists ’ perceived level of safety using a bicycle 
simulator combined with immersive virtual reality. Accident Analysis & Prevention, 151 , Article 105943. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.AAP.2020.105943 
Ospina, J. P., Botero-Fern ´andez, V., Duque, J. C., Brussel, M., & Grigolon, A. (2020). Understanding cycling travel distance: The case of Medellin city (Colombia). 
Transportation Research Part D: Transport and Environment, 86 . https://doi.org/10.1016/J.TRD.2020.102423 
Pelzer, P., Geertman, S., van der Heijden, R., & Rouwette, E. (2014). The added value of Planning Support Systems: A practitioner ’ s perspective. Computers, 
Environment and Urban Systems, 48 , 16 – 27. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.COMPENVURBSYS.2014.05.002 
Pelzer, P., Geertman, S., & van der Heijden, R. (2016). A comparison of the perceived added value of PSS applications in group settings. Computers, Environment and 
Urban Systems, 56 , 25 – 35. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.COMPENVURBSYS.2015.10.008 
Popelka, S., & Dolez ˘alov ´a, J. (2015). Non-photorealistic 3D visualization in city maps: An eye-tracking study. Modern Trends in Cartography, 357 – 367 . https://doi.org/ 
10.1007/978-3-319-07926-4_27/FIGURES/3 
Riener, C. (2019). New Approaches and Debates on Top-Down Perceptual Processing. Teaching of Psychology, 46 (3), 267 – 272. https://doi.org/10.1177/ 
0098628319853943 
Schwarzkopf, S., Büchner, S. J., H ¨olscher, C., & Konieczny, L. (2016). Perspective tracking in the real world: Gaze angle analysis in a collaborative wayfinding task. 
Spatial Cognition & Computation, 17 (1 – 2), 143 – 162. https://doi.org/10.1080/13875868.2016.1226841 
Scott, D. M., Lu, W., & Brown, M. J. (2021). Route choice of bike share users: Leveraging GPS data to derive choice sets. Journal of Transport Geography, 90 , Article 
102903. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JTRANGEO.2020.102903 
Segadilha, A. B. P., da Sanches, S., & P.. (2014). Identification of Factors that Influence Cyclist ´s Route Choice. Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences, 160 , 372 – 380. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.SBSPRO.2014.12.149 
Spielman, R. M., Jenkins, W. J., & Lovett, M. D. (2020). Psychology 2e (Vol. 1,, OpenStax. . 
Sun, Y., Du, Y., Wang, Y., & Zhuang, L. (2017). Examining Associations of Environmental Characteristics with Recreational Cycling Behaviour by Street-Level Strava 
Data. International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health 2017, Vol. 14, Page 644 , 14 (6), 644. 10.3390/IJERPH14060644. 
Tobii Pro AB. (2014). Tobii Pro Lab (1.152.30002). Tobii Pro AB. 
van Acker, V., van Wee, B., & Witlox, F. (2010). When Transport Geography Meets Social Psychology: Toward a Conceptual Model of Travel Behaviour. Transport 
Reviews, 30 (2), 219 – 240. https://doi.org/10.1080/01441640902943453 
Verhoeven, H., Van Hecke, L., Van Dyck, D., Baert, T., Van de Weghe, N., Clarys, P., … Van Cauwenberg, J. (2018). Differences in physical environmental 
characteristics between adolescents ’ actual and shortest cycling routes: A study using a Google Street View-based audit. International Journal of Health Geographics, 
17 (1), 1 – 15. https://doi.org/10.1186/S12942-018-0136-X/TABLES/5 
Wang, D., & Zhou, M. (2017). The built environment and travel behavior in urban China: A literature review. Transportation Research Part D: Transport and 
Environment, 52 , 574 – 585. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trd.2016.10.031 
Willis, D. P., Manaugh, K., & El-Geneidy, A. (2015). Cycling Under Influence: Summarizing the Influence of Perceptions, Attitudes, Habits, and Social Environments on 
Cycling for Transportation. International Journal of Sustainable Transportation, 9 (8), 565 – 579. https://doi.org/10.1080/15568318.2013.827285 
Winters, M., Teschke, K., Grant, M., Setton, E. M., & Brauer, M. (2010). How Far Out of the Way Will We Travel?: Built Environment Influences on Route Selection for 
Bicycle and Car Travel. Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board, 2190 (2190), 1 – 10. https://doi.org/10.3141/2190-01 
R.N. Ramirez Juarez et al.                                                                                                                                                                                           Transportation Research Part F: Psychology and Behaviour 99 (2023) 374–388
388
Yang, L., Ao, Y., Ke, J., Lu, Y., & Liang, Y. (2021). To walk or not to walk? Examining non-linear effects of streetscape greenery on walking propensity of older adults. 
Journal of Transport Geography, 94, Article 103099. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JTRANGEO.2021.103099 
Yang, Y., Wu, X., Zhou, P., Gou, Z., & Lu, Y. (2019). Towards a cycling-friendly city: An updated review of the associations between built environment and cycling 
behaviors (2007–2017). Journal of Transport & Health, 14, Article 100613. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JTH.2019.100613 
Zhou, H., Gu, J., Liu, Y., & Wang, X. (2022). The impact of the “skeleton” and “skin” for the streetscape on the walking behavior in 3D vertical cities. Landscape and 
Urban Planning, 227, Article 104543. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.LANDURBPLAN.2022.104543 
R.N. Ramirez Juarez et al.                                                                                                                                                                                           