IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 26, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025 1689
Which Cycling Environment Appears Safer?
Learning Cycling Safety Perceptions From Pairwise
Image Comparisons
Miguel Costa
 , Manuel Marques, Carlos Lima Azevedo
 , Felix Wilhelm Siebert
 , and Filipe Moura
Abstract— Cycling is critical for cities to transition to more
sustainable transport modes. Yet, safety concerns remain a
critical deterrent for individuals to cycle. If individuals perceive
an environment as unsafe for cycling, it is likely that they
will prefer other means of transportation. Yet, capturing and
understanding how individuals perceive cycling risk is complex
and often slow, with researchers defaulting to traditional surveys
and in-loco interviews. In this study, we tackle this problem.
We base our approach on using pairwise comparisons of real-
world images, repeatedly presenting respondents with pairs of
road environments and asking them to select the one they perceive
as safer for cycling, if any. Using the collected data, we train a
siamese-convolutional neural network using a multi-loss frame-
work that learns from individuals’ responses, learns preferences
directly from images, and includes ties (often discarded in the
literature). Effectively, this model learns to predict human-style
perceptions, evaluating which cycling environments are perceived
as safer. Our model achieves good results, showcasing this
approach has a real-life impact, such as improving interventions’
effectiveness. Furthermore, it facilitates the continuous assess-
ment of changing cycling environments, permitting short-term
evaluations of measures to enhance perceived cycling safety.
Received 4 October 2023; revised 5 July 2024 and 18 October 2024;
accepted 16 November 2024. Date of publication 3 January 2025; date of
current version 4 February 2025. This work was supported in part by the Fun-
dação para a Ciência e Tecnologia (FCT) under Grant PD/BD/142948/2018;
in part by the Civil Engineering Research and Innovation for Sustain-
ability (CERIS) FCT funding under Grant UIDB/04625/2020; in part by
the Laboratory for Robotics and Engineering Systems (LARSyS) FCT
funding (DOI: 10.54499/LA/P/0083/2020, 10.54499/UIDP/50009/2020, and
10.54499/UIDB/50009/2020); in part by the PT Smart Retail Project through
Agência para a Competitividade e Inovação (IAPMEI)–Agência para a Com-
petitividade e Inovação under Grant PRR-02/C05-i01.01/2022.PC645440011-
00000062; in part by the Department of Technology, Management, and
Economics at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU); and in part
by STREETS4ALL Project under Grant PTDC/ECI-TRA/3120/2021 [DOI:
10.54499/PTDC/ECI-TRA/3120/2021]. The Associate Editor for this article
was Q. Wang. (Corresponding author: Miguel Costa.)
This work involved human subjects or animals in its research. Approval of
all ethical and experimental procedures and protocols was granted by Instituto
Superior Técnico’s Ethics Committee.
Miguel Costa is with the Civil Engineering Research and Innovation for
Sustainability and the Institute for Systems and Robotics, Instituto Superior
Técnico, Universidade de Lisboa, 1649-004 Lisbon, Portugal, and also with
the Department of Technology, Management and Economics, Technical Uni-
versity of Denmark, 2800 Lyngby, Denmark (e-mail: migcos@dtu.dk).
Manuel Marques is with the Institute for Systems and Robotics, Instituto
Superior Técnico, Universidade de Lisboa, 1649-004 Lisbon, Portugal (e-mail:
manuel@isr.tecnico.ulisboa.pt).
Carlos Lima Azevedo and Felix Wilhelm Siebert are with the Department of
Technology, Management and Economics, Technical University of Denmark,
2800 Lyngby, Denmark (e-mail: climaz@dtu.dk; felix@dtu.dk).
Filipe Moura is with the Civil Engineering Research and Innovation for
Sustainability, Instituto Superior Técnico, Universidade de Lisboa, 1649-004
Lisbon, Portugal (e-mail: fmoura@tecnico.ulisboa.pt).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TITS.2024.3507639
Finally, our method can be efficiently deployed in different
locations with a growing number of openly available street-view
images.
Index Terms— Perception of cycling safety, subjective cycling
safety, siamese-convolutional neural network, pairwise image
comparisons, Berlin (Germany).
I. I NTRODUCTION
C
YCLING
can promote short and long-term health ben-
efits [1], [2] and reduce greenhouse gas emissions and
air pollutants [3], [4], compelling cities to promote cycling as
a means of transportation. However, many deterrents exist for
people not to cycle. These include social barriers [5], physical
barriers [6], and psychological factors [7].
From these, safety concerns (fears of being involved in
an accident) are often considered the main deterrent to
cycling [8], [9]. If individuals perceive cycling environments
as unsafe, they will avoid cycling and most certainly prefer
other modes of transportation. Previously, perception of safety
has been found to be affected by different factors, including
helmets and clothing [10], [11], road users’ behavior [12],
road usage and compliance with rules [10], or infrastructure
and cycling facilities [13], [14], [15], [16]. Research has
been typically carried out using in situ surveys or post-riding
interviews and conventional choice modeling tools. However,
these are often not scalable due to their inherent high costs,
making them not easily redeployed over time or space.
This work presents a novel methodological approach to
more efficiently assess the perception of cycling safety, learn-
ing perceived cycling safety directly from real-world images
and users’ choices. Effectively, we want to answer the fol-
lowing question: “Given two cycling environments, which
is perceived as safer for cycling?”, as shown in Figure 1
which presents an outline of the pairwise image comparison
survey we conducted. Ultimately, we use the collected data to
develop a model which can be used to score and map cycling
environments’ perceived safety, which we showcase for Berlin,
Germany. Our work’s main contributions are threefold:
• We create and deploy a new pairwise image comparison
survey where we repeatedly present respondents with two
road environment images and ask them to select the one
they perceive as safer for cycling, if any.
• We propose PCS-Net, a neural network that predicts
which environment is perceived as safer for cycling from
two images trained on the collected comparisons.
1558-0016 © 2025 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: National University of Singapore. Downloaded on June 24,2025 at 09:17:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 1690 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 26, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025
Fig. 1. Example of the pairwise image comparison survey. Users are shown
two images and asked to select the one they consider safer for cycling, if any.
• PCS-Net is able to predict and learn from ties (when
there is no perceived difference between the two images),
which are often discarded in past research.
Next, we overview related work in Section II. Section III
explains our approach, including data and models. Experimen-
tal results are detailed in Section IV, and we apply PCS-Net
at a city-wide scale in Section V. Section VI discusses our
results and its limitations. Section VII finalizes the paper and
draws possible paths for future research.
II. R ELATED WORK
A. Subjective Cycling Safety
Perceived or subjective cycling safety relates to how humans
subjectively experience cycling accident risk. As the most
critical deterrent to urban cycling [8], [9], understanding
what impacts it is vital to adequately provide cyclists with
environments they feel safe. Aspects that contribute to this
sense of safety include: traffic [8], interactions with drivers and
road rules compliance [10], [17], sharing the road space [18],
and road and cycling infrastructure [15], [19].
Past research has typically focused on qualitative surveys,
in situ or post-riding interviews to identify elements that
negatively arouse individuals [8], [11]. However, these are
often time-consuming and costly, requiring critical preparation
and control, making these approaches not scalable nor trans-
ferable between cities. Additionally, due to their inherent focus
on specific routes or infrastructure typologies, recruitment of
interviewees may not be easy, leading to non-diverse and non-
representative groups of individuals being interviewed [20].
More recent approaches, mainly driven by technological
advances, have led researchers to conduct other exper-
iments. These focus on quantitatively assessing human
responses, including using wearable sensors [21], cycling
videos [22], drawings of mental maps [23], virtual reality [24],
semi-realistic street-view-style images [25], or eye tracking
devices [26]. Yet, these usually require precise calibration
and monitoring or individual training to use such technology,
hindering their transferability and repeatability.
All in all, understanding the impact of different elements on
individuals’ perceptions can lead to objectively characterize
urban environments, leading to the creation of indicators
or indices that can help urban planners compare and ana-
lyze different environments. To this end, the Bicycle Stress
Level [27] and the Level of Traffic Stress [28], [29] remain the
most well-known indices that attempt to measure bikeability
and perceived risk. Yet, to compute such metrics, manual
labor is usually employed, requiring individuals to anno-
tate environment elements manually. Reference [30] approach
fills this gap, deriving a bikeability index from computer
vision-extracted features from street-view images (SVI). This
automatic and scalable methodology to score environments
effortlessly can eventually replace more traditional techniques.
Nevertheless, it covers five bikeability aspects, of which per-
ceptions are one, which can be inadvertently mischaracterized
if appropriate supervision is not employed. In this work, we are
interested in a similar approach that covers the perception
of cycling risk only, is based on individuals’ perceptions
of what categorizes one environment as safer than another,
and is equally scalable. Such an approach, in principle, can
simulate individuals’ perceptions and thus reduce the time
and cost of assessing perceived safety compared to traditional
methodologies.
B. Computer Vision & SVI Applied in Urban Studies
Recently, a growing number of works have been exploring
image processing and computer vision techniques to study
urban environments and human perceptions. For example,
these have explored openness and enclosure [31], green-
ery [32], house prices [33], and different human perceptions
[34], [35], [36], [37], [38].
Research has typically used traditional or deep learning-
extracted features from SVI in classification or regression
problems to evaluate the impact of such environment-related
features. With the growing access to openly available street-
view images, researchers can perform continuous and scalable
assessments of urban environments more easily than in the
past. In transportation, using SVI has been proven useful
in, among others, studying accessibility [39], [40], walkabil-
ity [37], bikeability [30], and objective road safety [41].
With this in mind, our work is greatly inspired by that
of [35], which uses computer vision to predict how individuals
sense urban environments across different perspectives. The
authors use a large database of image comparisons to train
a model capable of “simulating” human choice. Such work
has laid the foundations for many possible city-wide analyses,
such as understanding how the built environment might affect
behavior, travel choices, and even home location. Further,
as the authors demonstrate and hypothesize, such an approach
can be used to enlarge existing datasets and expand predictions
across geographies. This endeavor can help to better allocate
city resources and make data-driven decisions. Yet, their model
disregards a vast number of observations as it cannot handle
ties (equally perceived images). We consider that there is
a lot of information to be gained here. Thus, we build up
from [35]’s approach, proposing a methodology that draws
from pairwise image comparisons, includes ties, and can be
applied to analyze cycling perception of safety.
C. Pairwise Comparisons
Pairwise comparison models aim to predict the outcome of
a two-item comparison, i.e., when comparing A and B, would
Authorized licensed use limited to: National University of Singapore. Downloaded on June 24,2025 at 09:17:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. COSTA et al.: WHICH CYCLING ENVIRONMENT APPEARS SAFER? LEARNING CYCLING SAFETY PERCEPTIONS 1691
a user prefer A, B, or would they be perceived equally (tie)?
Models typically follow the seminal works of [42] and [43],
which assume a latent score s and the outcome probability of
comparing items i and j a function of their scores, e.g., a user
would likely choose item i if si > sj . The underlying goal is
then to estimate the latent scores si from data.
In principle, this is similar to the approach often used
in contrast learning or rank sorting. For one, contrast and
comparison in the perception of human beings has led to con-
trastive learning method [44] where a model learns similarities
and differences by looking at positive and negative examples
versus an original example. Here, the goal is to maximize sim-
ilarities between identical items while minimizing similarities
between dissimilar items. On the other hand, in rank sorting,
the goal is to order items based on a learnt latent score (rank).
Yet, both approaches, together with paired models, seek to
objectively uncover an item’s latent score that can be used
later to understand how similar or dissimilar items are.
In paired models, several methodologies have been proposed
to extend the mentioned seminal works, including itera-
tive algorithms [45], Bayesian models [46], spectral ranking
algorithms [47], convex problem formulation [48], Gaussian
processes [49], or other deep learning approaches [50]. Yet,
most of these do not consider an item’s characteristics. In this
work, we focus on deriving items’ scores directly from their
features, and we hypothesyze that including such information
can help achieve better prediction accuracy.
III. L EARNING FROM PAIRWISE IMAGE COMPARISONS
Images are vital in conveying messages and representations
of real-world. We frame our approach under this context, using
real-world images to map users’ safety perceptions of cycling
environments. In this section, we will now detail our approach,
including data collection and model training to predict which
cycling environments are perceived as safer for cycling.
A. Data: Pairwise Image Comparisons Survey
First, we created a survey to capture data about individuals’
safety perceptions semi-naturalistically. This two-part survey
was approved by Instituto Superior Técnico’s Ethics Commit-
tee and i) captured individuals’ cycling profiles (i.e., cycling
proficiency), and ii) perceived cycling accident safety in dif-
ferent environments using pairwise image comparisons. The
first part consists of a modified version of [51] that classified
individuals according to four cycling profiles:No Way, No How
(NWNH), Interested but Concerned (IC), Enthused and Confi-
dent (EC), and Strong and Fearless (SF) [52]. The sociodemo-
graphic characteristics of participants were also captured. The
survey was deployed online and took about 10-15 minutes
to complete. Overall, 251 individuals partook in the survey.
These were characterized as being 6% NWNH, 53% IC, 37%
EC, and 4% SF; 60% identified as male, 40% as female, and
<1% as other/prefer not to answer (NA); <1% were aged
18–20, 45% were 21–30, 30% were 31–40, 16% were 41–50,
8% were 51–60, and the rest were 61, older or NA.
In this work, we focus exclusively on the second part of the
survey. Data collected consists of 7281 pairwise image com-
parisons (3.3 average comparisons per image), of which 18%
were ties. Unlike traditional surveys, pairwise comparisons
are straightforward, well suited for non-expert participants,
and generally lead to lower measurement error than direct
ratings [53]. We repeatedly presented respondents with two
real-world images of cycling environments and asked them
to select the one they thought was safer cycling. Equally
sized images were shown side-by-side and users could choose
between the left image ( y = −1), right image (y = 1), or,
if they thought there was no apparent difference between the
two, they could choose a “tie” (y = 0) option. Figure 1 depicts
the image comparison setup.
To choose what pairs of images were shown to participants,
we used an iterative approach. We began by download-
ing 4,480 road environment pictures of Berlin, Germany,
from Mapillary (https://www.mapillary.com/), capturing var-
ious infrastructure layouts, urban features, lighting conditions,
and traffic conditions. Given the diversity of cycling environ-
ments in these images, we employed a fractional factorial
design to select which pairs of images to present to users.
Each image and its corresponding cycling environment were
pre-processed through semantic segmentation and built envi-
ronment data extraction. We applied OCRNET [54] to
segment each image and identify object areas, such as veg-
etation, people, and cars. In total 19 classes of objects
are extracted. Additionally, we extracted built environment
data from OpenStreetMaps (https://www.openstreetmap.org/,
OSM), including road hierarchies, land use, presence of
cycling lanes, and urban furniture. In total, 192 urban elements
are captured from OSM.
Using both the semantic segmentation data and street-
level data, we created potential image pairs by matching
specific information. To accomplish this we begin by randomly
selecting one image and randomly choosing eight possible
environment characteristics (e.g., cars, vegetation, sidewalks,
pedestrians, primary roads, cycling lanes, shops, traffic lights)
from the set of 211 possible variables. Next, we look for
other images that contain similar values of such characteristics,
while allowing other variables to vary. After selecting the
two images, we presented the pair to the participant. This
fractional factorial design maximizes the information obtained
from image pairs while reducing the number of experimental
runs required, which would be unmanageable in a full factorial
design. Finally, to ensure balanced exposure, we prioritized
showing images that had been displayed fewer times in the
past, so that all images were shown an equal number of times.
B. PCS-Net
Our model seeks to uncover the underlying patterns and
principles that guide individuals’ subjective safety judgments
when comparing and selecting between different images.
Specifically, we seek to learn transformation function f (xi ) to
predict an individual’s choice y when presented with images
xi and x j . The models outlined here follow the rationale
of the networks by [35], namely their classification and
ranking networks. However, we modify these networks to
better suit our problem and expand them to allow ties in
comparisons as we find these can often bring information
gain.
Authorized licensed use limited to: National University of Singapore. Downloaded on June 24,2025 at 09:17:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 1692 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 26, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025
Fig. 2. Architectures of PCS-Net C (above) and PCS-Net R (below) and corresponding losses ( LC for PCS-Net C and L R and L1 for PCS-Net R), which,
when combined, make up PCS-Net. Layer sizes are shown below each layer.
1) Classification Problem: Given an individual’s choice y ∈
{−1, 0, +1}, we want our model to predict said choice, i.e., the
user chose the left image, a tie, or the right image. As such,
we begin by designing the Classification-Perception of Cycling
Safety Network (PCS-Net C ). Figure 2 shows the architecture
of this network, which is divided into two sections: i) a feature
extractor sub-network (backbone) and ii) a fusion network.
The former is a Siamese-style network [55], where each
identical branch with tied weights learns to map an input image
to a latent representation of itself, acting as a feature extractor.
Next, both branches are merged in the fusion sub-network[35],
which in turn learns a combination of filters, ending with a
softmax loss ( LC ) used to train the network.
2) Ranking Problem: The main goal is to find a ranking
score for each image, such that it represents an ordinal
ranking among all images in the dataset. To make a prediction,
ranking scores are compared between the two input images,
and a choice is made following the highest-ranked image, i.e.,
the one perceived as safer. To achieve this, a slightly different
network is designed: Ranking-Perception of Cycling Safety
Network (PCS-Net R), as shown in Figure 2. This network is
subdivided into two components: i) a feature extractor sub-
network (equal to the classification formulation) and ii) a
ranking sub-network [35]. In essence, this sub-network uses
fully connected layers to reduce the features extracted from
the backbone to a ranking score for an input image. As such,
we learn function f (xi ), such that when a choice y is made
between xi and x j we want to satisfy
−y · ( f (xi ) − f (x j )) >0, (1)
with y ∈ {−1,+1}, with y = −1 for when image xi wins
the comparison, and +1 if x j wins. In essence, f (x) ranks
images based on their features, with higher-ranked images
denoting images perceived safer for cycling. This problem can
be expanded to denote a ranking loss:
L ˆR(xi , x j ) = max(0, −y · ( f (xi ) − f (x j )) + γ ), (2)
which also allows the introduction of a margin term γ . Using
this loss function, we are essentially penalizing comparisons
in which image ranking orders are opposite to the individual’s
choice while favoring comparisons where a choice was made
for an image ranked higher (perceived safer). However, L ˆR
does not account for possible ties in a decision maker’s choice
(y = 0). When a tie occurs, perceived cycling safety scores
should be similar, as the respondent could not distinguish
which one was deemed safer between the two images. This
entails that both image rankings should be closer, which can
be translated using a different loss for tie comparisons:
L1(xi , x j ) = max(0, || f (xi ) − f (x j )||1 − γ ), (3)
with | · |1 being the L1 norm. In essence, L1 pushes images
from tie comparisons together. Finally, to train our model,
we combine both losses and minimize:
L R = 1 y∈{−1,+1}L ˆR + λ1 · 1 y∈{0}L1, (4)
with 1 y∈{−1,+1} being an indicator function for non-tie com-
parisons, 1 y∈{0} an indicator function for tie comparisons, and
λ1 a weight term to modulate the importance of ties.
3) Classification & Ranking Problem: Finally, we design
an approach that combines both the classification and rank-
ing tasks together. This approach learns in an end-to-end
framework how to predict which of the two input images is
considered safer for cycling. This Perception of Cycling Safety
Network (PCS-Net) joins all the above architectures: i) feature
extractor, ii) fusion, and iii) ranking sub-networks. Training is
performed by minimizing the multi-loss function:
L = LC + λ ˆR · 1 y∈{−1,+1}L ˆR + λ1 · 1 y∈{0}L1, (5)
with λ ˆR and λ1 being hyper-parameters to be chosen to model
loss component importance and maximize model accuracy.
We experiment with different hyper-parameters in Section IV.
IV. R ESULTS
We now present the results from our work. Figure 3 shows
our model training and validation framework. To showcase
PCS-Net’s ability to capture perceived cycling safety from
images, we use two datasets originating from human-evaluated
cycling environment images (in addition to our own dataset
Authorized licensed use limited to: National University of Singapore. Downloaded on June 24,2025 at 09:17:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. COSTA et al.: WHICH CYCLING ENVIRONMENT APPEARS SAFER? LEARNING CYCLING SAFETY PERCEPTIONS 1693
Fig. 3. Framework used for model validation using human labelled data (semi-realistic and our real-world data). Data is split in training sets to train models A
and B, which are evaluated on the development sets until convergence is met. Models A and B are then validated on unseen data (validation sets). The best
performing model is then used for extrapolating perceived scores for unlabelled images at a city-wide scale in Section V.
described in Section III-A, we use data adapted from [25])
and estimate two models. In either dataset, we randomly
split pairwise image comparisons in 70-10-20% for training,
development, and validation (hold-out, test set).
As typically done, we train both models using the training
set and iteratively test them on the development set to uncover
the best hyperparameters that produce the best model. The
best performing model is then tested and validated on the
validation set containing observations the model has not seen
before. All results below pertain to the model’s results on
the validation set. Unless otherwise stated, we compare our
approach to other paired models that do not include ties
using accuracy. We compute a non-margin accuracy metric
for non-tie observations as the ratio of the correctly predicted
left and right comparisons to all comparisons.
All experiments used Python, PyTorch2 [56], and an
NVIDIA GeForce 3080Ti GPU. Weights for the ranking
and fusion sub-network were initialized from a uniform
distribution relative to each layer’s size. Learning rate was
set to 0.001, decaying every 10k steps, ADAM [57] as our
optimization procedure, and a batch size of 128 and up to
20 maximum epochs, or until validation accuracy stopped
improving. We make all data and code publicly available
online: https://github.com/mncosta/cycling_
safety_subjective_learning_pairwise.
A. Model A
To validate our proposed model, we begin by using a
dataset of semi-realistic images of 1900 computer-generated
infrastructure typologies in Berlin [25]. The original data
contains answers to an online survey where users were
asked to assess their perception of safety using a 4-point
scale. We adapted this dataset to our use case, transforming
each judged image to pairwise comparisons following [58]’s
approach. For each user, if image A was judged higher than
B, we generated a comparison between A and B, where A was
chosen. If both images were scored equally, then we generated
a tie. We repeated this process for all users, resulting in
∼2 million pairwise comparisons. We use these comparisons
and images to train PCS-Net. We name the fitted model as
Model A.
Figure 4 showcases examples of images ranked by Model A,
together with increasing (left to right) perceived safety scores.
The left-most image depicts the lowest perceived environment,
where a cyclist shares a road with tram rails and other traffic.
On the opposite side, we can see a cyclist on a dedicated cycle
lane as being perceived as very safe.
We employ such a dataset given its vast amount of obser-
vations, allowing us to compare our model to other pairwise
comparison methods: TrueSkill [46], Elo [45], Gaussian Pro-
cess [49], and Rank Centrality [59]. Table I shows the accuracy
of our model versus other models, achieving comparable
performance for the ranking models and a subpar perfor-
mance for the classification task. Now, suppose we reduce the
number of available average pairwise comparisons per image
(effectively reducing the number of available comparisons).
When constrained by the size of the training data, our model
vastly outperforms the remaining pairwise models, as shown
in Figure 5, reaching about 15% improved accuracy, which can
be very beneficial when data acquired from surveys is low.
B. Model B
Next, we move to our work’s core results, which apply
PCS-Net to real-world images and pairwise comparisons,
as detailed in Section III-A. Data contains responses from
251 users on images from Berlin on 7281 comparisons
(3.3 average comparisons per image), of which 18% consist
of ties.
Authorized licensed use limited to: National University of Singapore. Downloaded on June 24,2025 at 09:17:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 1694 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 26, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025
Fig. 4. Examples of images ranked by their perceived safety scores. Ranked semi-realistic from model (top) A and real images from Model B (bottom) with
increasing (left to right) perceived safety scores are shown.
Fig. 5. Model accuracy with varying number of average comparisons for
different paired models.
TABLE I
COMPARISON OF MODEL A VERSUS OTHER PAIRED
COMPARISON MODELS
We begin by comparing our approach versus other pairwise
models to compare their performance in predicting which
cycling environment appears safer. Again, we test our method
against TrueSkill [46], Elo [45], Gaussian Process [49], and
Rank Centrality [59], shown in Table II. As expected, given the
low number of average pairwise comparisons per image avail-
able in our data, PCS-Net outperforms competing approaches
with a ∼17% improvement. This means that PCS-Net can
effectively learn rankings directly from images, even when
the number of available comparisons is limited.
Next, we experiment with different network backbones (fea-
ture extraction sub-network) and different model hyperparame-
ters. Backbone networks (feature extractor sub-networks) were
initialized using the pre-trained Imagenet weights available
TABLE II
COMPARISON OF MODEL B VERSUS OTHER PAIRED
COMPARISON MODELS
TABLE III
MODEL B ACCURACY USING DIFFERENT BACKBONES , WITH AND
WITHOUT DATA AUGMENTATION USING SEMI -REALISTIC DATA
publicly: AlexNet [60], VGG [61], and ResNet [62]. Table III
shows the model’s accuracy using different backbones. VGG
achieves the highest accuracy, and it is closely followed
by ResNet and AlexNet. Additionally, we test whether aug-
menting our real image dataset by adding semi-realistic data
improves model performance. For this, we train our model
using a combination of real-world images and a similar-sized
set of random semi-realistic pictures. Looking at the lower
section of Table III, we see that results improve slightly, with
the highest accuracy being achieved again with VGG. Thus,
augmenting our dataset with semi-realistic image comparisons
leads to better prediction accuracy.
Next, we test the impact of including ties and use of the
margin γ . Figure 6 shows the model’s accuracy over γ when
PCS-Net is trained with and without ties. Additionally, we plot
the default baseline when PCS-Net does not account for ties
or margin effects (in blue) for comparison. When we set γ >
0.4, the model trained with ties achieves an average 3% lower
accuracy than the non-tie trained model’s accuracy.
Authorized licensed use limited to: National University of Singapore. Downloaded on June 24,2025 at 09:17:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. COSTA et al.: WHICH CYCLING ENVIRONMENT APPEARS SAFER? LEARNING CYCLING SAFETY PERCEPTIONS 1695
Fig. 6. PCS-Net accuracy trained with and without ties, for varying γ .
Fig. 7. Average absolute error for misclassified observations between models
trained with and without ties, for varying γ .
So far, we have looked at model performance and compared
them to approaches that either do not allow ties or do not
include such additions easily. Yet, including ties allows partic-
ipants not to choose a preference, when in fact there is none.
More, knowing when there is no distinguishable difference
between two images can be highly valuable in practice,
informing planners and decision-makers which environments
are perceived equally. To account for this aspect, we now
compute a different accuracy metric to includeties as an output
class and use γ to distinguish between ties and non-ties. This
new metric is computed as the ratio of the correctly predicted
left (i.e., f (xi ) >f (x j ) + γ ), right ( f (x j ) >f (xi ) + γ ), and
tie (| f (xi ) − f (x j )| < γ) comparisons to all comparisons.
It concedes an interval defined by γ when there is insuf-
ficient rank difference between images. When this happens,
we consider there is no noticeable difference between the two
images, and the comparison is expected to result in a tie.
Using this new, more general metric, one can rank images and
simultaneously test whether a comparison is expected to result
in a tie. We again test our models trained with and without
ties and compute the new (3-class) accuracy and error rates
for γ , achieving comparable results. However, analyzing the
magnitude error of incorrectly classified observations (i.e., loss
of misclassified observation) in Figure 7, the model trained
with ties achieves an average absolute error much lower than
Fig. 8. Rank difference distribution between tie and non-tie observations
when PCS-Net is trained without (above) and with (below) ties, for γ = 0.7.
Fig. 9. Average rank difference between images in comparisons for varying
γ . We show the impact on the average rank difference between ties and
non-ties observations.
its non-ties trained counterpart. Moreover, the absolute error
on wrongly classified images was relatively low (< 0.07) at
its minimum (γ = 0.7), suggesting that even for misclassified
comparisons, including ties leads to a lower error.
Using this γ , one can also analyze the distribution of image
rank differences for comparisons between a model trained with
and without ties. Looking at Figure 8, the model incorporating
ties (below) pushes ties below margin |γ | and non-ties above
|γ |. In the model trained without ties, ties are much less
distinct and are dispersed among the left and right options.
Additionally, Figure 9 showcases the average rank differences
in comparisons for different margins. Notably, the average
difference for ties lies below γ whereas above γ for non-ties.
This approach corroborates the idea of allowing participants to
opt for ties to better reproduce their perceptions and improve
their engagement in comparing images more carefully, as they
are not forced to choose an option they are slightly unsure of.
V. C ITY-WIDE APPLICATION
To demonstrate how PCS-Net can be used to analyze
the perceived cycling safety of an entire city, we computed
perceived safety scores for the entire city of Berlin. To cover
all of Berlin, we geographically sampled points using a 100m
by 100m grid and projected them to the nearest cyclable path
or road. We then retrieved street view images from Mapillary
Authorized licensed use limited to: National University of Singapore. Downloaded on June 24,2025 at 09:17:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 1696 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 26, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025
Fig. 10. Map of perceived cycling safety throughout Berlin (a). Scaled perceived safety scores, from safer (blue) to unsafer (red), are shown for sampled
images in Berlin. Two areas are selected and shown in greater detail in (b) and (c).
for each point. We extracted 36,700 unlabelled images, which
we then ran through the most accurate PCS-Net model to
extrapolate their perceived scores. This gave us a perceived
cycling safety score for each image in Berlin, which, for
readability, we scaled between [0, 1].
Figure 10 showcases the perceived safety scores for Berlin.
As one would expect at the city-wide scale, scores are well
distributed throughout the whole city. Taking a closer look
(Figure 10.b), certain areas appear to be relatively perceived
as safer (predominantly blue-ish, such as Berlin’s north and
southeast) and seem to be more continuous. Examining the
corresponding images, we see that these correspond to less
urbanized areas where high levels of vegetation are visible in
the images. In the center of the city (Figure 10.c), locations
are not perceived as safe as before, with scores varying widely
within a relatively small area, even on locations on the same
road/street which exhibit changes in the levels of perception.
Additionally, we perform a human evaluations to ensure
that PCS-Net estimated scores on previously unseen Berlin
images accurately and it portraits the right level of perceived
safety. To this end, a set of images with scores ranging
from 0 (minimum score) to 1 (maximum score) were retrieved
and shown to users to assess. Overall, environments with a
lower score were consistently evaluated poorly in terms of
safety, average-scored environments were neither considered
very safe nor very unsafe, and environments whose scores
were predicted higher were considered safer by our human
evaluators.
On the whole, we showcase that there are several key
hotspots for environments that are perceived as safe and
Authorized licensed use limited to: National University of Singapore. Downloaded on June 24,2025 at 09:17:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. COSTA et al.: WHICH CYCLING ENVIRONMENT APPEARS SAFER? LEARNING CYCLING SAFETY PERCEPTIONS 1697
unsafe, while at the same time, some high-level continuous
hierarchy of perceived safety score seems to exist. From this,
aggregate and disaggregate metrics can help planners and
decision-makers highlight and prioritize urban environment
changes to make cyclists’ trips more enjoyable and provide
them with more comfortable ones to cycle in.
VI. D ISCUSSION
This work has focused on deriving cycling environments’
perceived safety scores from pairwise comparisons. Pairwise
image comparison surveys offer a systematic and quantitative
approach to investigate visual preferences and individuals’
perceptions, which can be used to quantify and categorize
environments. Analyzing visual preferences from real-world
images seeks to uncover the underlying patterns and principles
that guide individuals’ subjective perceptions.
Unlike most traditional paired models that ignore or avoid
tied comparisons between two items, here we have included
and underlined the importance of including ties. This follows
the idea of the seminal work of [63], where ties matter and
should be included to model comparisons when there is not
enough difference between two items for a user’s sense of per-
ception to note a difference. In addition, allowing participants
to choose a tie potentially increases their engagement, resulting
in more truthful choices and more accurate models. Moreover,
with reference to the Weber-Fechner laws of psychophysics,
which explore stimuli magnitudes and the ability to distinguish
between two stimuli, it would be interesting to model which
environmental factors influence users’ perceptions of cycling
safety in such a way that they can distinguish between
environments that appear safer for cycling. This knowledge
could provide researchers with even more approaches to
understanding the impact of different built environments on
different cyclists.
All in all, much of the work developed warrants that
ties should not be discarded when available. Results-wise,
including them results in comparable performance to non-ties-
only models, meaning that they can be included without any
loss. Even with the limited number of average comparisons per
image, we are able to derive good prediction power, meaning
that we can learn directly from the presented images and
survey responses to capture cycling safety perceptions.
Another aspect that could be explored is the use of
transformer-style networks, as these have recently gained
popularity in computer vision tasks (namely object detection,
semantic segmentation, and other learning tasks) for their
higher prediction accuracies. Yet, these are characterized by
requiring more data and processing power than traditional
convolutional-style networks. It would, however, be interesting
to explore the power of transformers and other network
configurations as more data on the perception of cycling safety
together with street-view images becomes available.
In practice, the approach we developed is extremely valu-
able not only in research but also in practice for urban planners
and decision-makers to adequately address cyclists’ needs
in terms of sense of safety and comfort. New cities can
employ a similar approach, deploying their own survey using
specific city images and training a new PCS-Net specific to
the city’s needs and perceptions. In essence, this would help
identify city areas (i.e., specific hotspots, streets, intersections,
or whole neighboorhoods) where cyclists feel unsafer. In turn,
this would allow city urban planners and transport authorities
to more efficiently understand how the perception of cycling
safety affects cyclists at that particular location and design
changes to improve cyclists’ sense of safety.
A. Limitations
The analysis and model present in this work have explored
how the perception of cycling safety and scoring cycling
environments can be made using a siamese-convolutional
neural network and a pairwise image comparison survey. Yet,
it is important to also acknowledge its limitations, especially
given the social and health aspects it indirectly covers.
First, it is important to consider that, despite our sample of
images capturing various weather conditions, vehicle densities,
lighting conditions, and road conditions, we could not account
for all possible combinations and scenarios. For instance,
while we included images with varying degrees of snow,
vehicles (cars, bicycles, vans, trucks, buses) and pedestrians,
images featuring sunny and cloudy depictions, as well as
images during daytime, dawn, and dusk, other specific types
of infrastructure that may limit visibility or alter cyclists’
behavior and more rare typologies of environments were not
frequently present. Expanding and including a wider variety
of environments in the survey may help address these gaps
and enhance PCS-Net’s validation across more contexts and
environments. Directly accounting for specific external factors
(e.g., weather conditions, different vehicles) is vital for urban
planners and decision makers to effectively create environ-
ments where cyclists feel safer. However, while such factors
like weather were not directly controlled, from our results
we believe PCS-Net has indirectly been able to account for
some of such factors shown directly on images. In practice
however, urban planners cannot change weather conditions;
rather, they should consider their importance when designing
and deploying new solutions. In turn, understanding how the
built environment holistically may affect subjective safety may
lead to more effective solutions to improve the sense of safety.
Second, we have demonstrated how PCS-Net can be used to
extrapolate city-wide perceived scores. While this application
is highly valuable for transport and road safety authorities, it is
not without limitations. It is important to acknowledge that
there is no definitive ground truth to compare the estimated
scores or pairwise comparisons against, i.e. a sample of
subjective evaluations collected on-site, where images were
taken, to fully validate the use of images as surrogates of
the real environment. We expect differences to exist since the
experience of cycling in the real environment involves dynamic
stimuli not present in an image evaluation experiment. Still,
as documented in previous literature, these have been used
as proxies (Section II) and future fieldwork will be required
to close the gap in our specific context. Nevertheless, in our
model validation, PCS-Net exhibited similar out-of-sample
prediction accuracy to in-sample testing. While these highlight
the potential of PCS-Net in estimating individuals’ perception
of safety, caution is warranted when applying PCS-Net to other
Authorized licensed use limited to: National University of Singapore. Downloaded on June 24,2025 at 09:17:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 1698 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 26, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025
contexts, such as different neighborhoods, cities or countries
where data was not available during training. Further analysis
with larger and more comprehensive datasets is necessary to
determine if the developed model can capture the general
sense of safety perception across distinct and diverse settings.
It is also important to assess whether PCS-Net can be used
for knowledge transfer between cities with different cycling
cultures and urban design philosophies.
Third, another important limitation regards our model’s
perception of safety scores when compared to in situ percep-
tions cyclists may have. In this work, we have assumed the
perception of safety to be captured directly from static images,
which were correctly validated in themselves. However, we
have not conducted any validation or comparison against safety
perception data collected directly from cyclists on the road.
Again, while PCS-Net presents itself as a novel and fast
alternative to understanding the perception of safety at a large
scale, care must be taken when directly assuming perceived
scores on the road as PCS-Net does not account for urban
dynamics or cyclists’ own actions, behaviour and beliefs,
which can also affect how cyclists perceived safety around
them. Similarly, while this work tackles subjective safety, care
must also be taken when relating it to objective safety, i.e., the
number or severity of cycling accidents. The relation between
subjective and objective safety is still not fully understood in
contexts where both follow similar trends and others where
perceived safety seems to be the opposite of actual safety
[64], [65], and thus caution must be exercised when trying
to connect the two. Further work should analyse both how
PCS-Net can be validated with in situ interviews and how its
scores relate to actual safety.
Fourth, to account for ties, we propose the use of margin
γ to model imperceptible differences between two images.
We used a fixed γ , which, in more general terms, may differ
across individuals. Yet, estimating independent γ ’s for each
user would allow for a better understanding of individual-
level perceptions. Allowing for γ to vary, either through
bootstrapping or other approaches, may be used to ably model
heterogeneity at an individual level or for different cycling
profiles. Additionally, accounting for different cycling profiles
and understanding specific differences between profiles can
help decision makers better tackle a group’s needs more effec-
tively, similar to what Guan et al. [38] do for incorporating
regional interactions and attribute correlations.
VII. C ONCLUSION
In this work, we have explored how cycling environment
pictures can be ranked according to individuals’ perceptions of
safety. We base our work on pairwise comparisons, presenting
participants with pairs of images and asking them to indicate
their preferred choice of which environment appears safer for
cycling. We then developed a siamese-style neural network
that cannot only rank images based on choices (left or right
image chosen), but also incorporate ties, often overlooked and
ignored in the literature. Our proposed methodology achieved
good results, requiring fewer observations than current paired
models, as knowledge can be directly driven from image
features and individuals’ decisions. We extensively tested our
approach on real-world data and real-world enriched data
using synthetic images. Finally, we tested a city-wide appli-
cation of our approach throughout Berlin.
In the future, we plan to use the approach detailed here
to analyze other cities and understand if the perception of
safety can be generalized across cities with different urban
characteristics or cycling cultures. Moreover, not only is under-
standing what environments appear safer for cycling important,
but knowing which of those environments’ characteristics
increase or decrease the sense of safety is vital. As such,
we aim to identify urban elements and quantify their impact
on the perception of safety in finer detail. One possible
practical application where such information could be used is
in the understanding of cyclists’ route choices to verify how
cyclists base their routes on safety perceptions. This may help
urban planners design environments where cyclists feel safer.
Another possible path forward is the use of cycling videos
instead of static images. This approach could help researchers
understand how temporal changes and more urban dynamics
impact the perception of cycling safety. Finally, understanding
the effect of individuals’ cycling profiles and how they per-
ceive cycling safety differently can also be valuable to better
address individuals’ needs.
REFERENCES
[1] P. Oja et al., “Health benefits of cycling: A systematic review,” Scandin.
J. Med. Sci. Sports, vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 496–509, Aug. 2011.
[2] T. Götschi, J. Garrard, and B. Giles-Corti, “Cycling as a part of daily life:
A review of health perspectives,” Transp. Rev., vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 45–71,
Jan. 2016.
[3] J. Mason, L. Fulton, and Z. McDonald, “A global high shift cycling sce-
nario: The potential for dramatically increasing bicycle and E-bike use in
cities around the world, with estimated energy, CO 2, and cost impacts,”
Inst. Transp. & Develop. Policy Univ. California, Davis, Tech. Rep.,
Nov. 2015. [Online]. Available: https://ecf.com/sites/ecf.com/files/A-
Global-High-Shift-Cycling-Scenario Nov-2015.pdf
[4] A. Neves and C. Brand, “Assessing the potential for carbon emissions
savings from replacing short car trips with walking and cycling using
a mixed GPS-travel diary approach,” Transp. Res. A, Policy Pract.,
vol. 123, pp. 130–146, May 2019.
[5] E. Heinen, B. van Wee, and K. Maat, “Commuting by bicycle:
An overview of the literature,” Transp. Rev., vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 59–96,
Jan. 2010.
[6] J. Pucher, “Cycling safety on bikeways vs. roads,” Transp. Quart.,
vol. 55, no. 4, pp. 9–11, Jan. 2001.
[7] M. A. Stinson and C. R. Bhat, “Frequency of bicycle commuting:
Internet-based survey analysis,” Transp. Res. Record: J. Transp. Res.
Board, vol. 1878, no. 1, pp. 122–130, Jan. 2004.
[8] R. L. Sanders, “Perceived traffic risk for cyclists: The impact of near
miss and collision experiences,” Accident Anal. Prevention, vol. 75,
pp. 26–34, Feb. 2015.
[9] R. Félix, F. Moura, and K. J. Clifton, “Maturing urban cycling:
Comparing barriers and motivators to bicycle of cyclists and non-
cyclists in Lisbon, Portugal,” J. Transp. Health, vol. 15, Dec. 2019,
Art. no. 100628.
[10] A. R. Lawson, V . Pakrashi, B. Ghosh, and W. Y . Szeto, “Perception of
safety of cyclists in Dublin city,” Accident Anal. Prevention, vol. 50,
pp. 499–511, Jan. 2013.
[11] R. Aldred and J. Woodcock, “Reframing safety: An analysis of percep-
tions of cycle safety clothing,” Transp. Policy, vol. 42, pp. 103–112,
Aug. 2015.
[12] N. Chaurand and P. Delhomme, “Cyclists and drivers in road interac-
tions: A comparison of perceived crash risk,” Accident Anal. Prevention,
vol. 50, pp. 1176–1184, Jan. 2013.
[13] M. Møller and T. Hels, “Cyclists’ perception of risk in roundabouts,”
Accident Anal. Prevention, vol. 40, no. 3, pp. 1055–1062, May 2008.
[14] K. Wang and G. Akar, “The perceptions of bicycling intersection
safety by four types of bicyclists,” Transp. Res. Part F , Traffic Psychol.
Behaviour, vol. 59, pp. 67–80, Nov. 2018.
Authorized licensed use limited to: National University of Singapore. Downloaded on June 24,2025 at 09:17:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. COSTA et al.: WHICH CYCLING ENVIRONMENT APPEARS SAFER? LEARNING CYCLING SAFETY PERCEPTIONS 1699
[15] E. S. Chataway, S. Kaplan, T. A. S. Nielsen, and C. G. Prato, “Safety
perceptions and reported behavior related to cycling in mixed traffic:
A comparison between Brisbane and Copenhagen,” Transp. Res. F ,
Traffic Psychol. Behav., vol. 23, pp. 32–43, Mar. 2014.
[16] S. U. Jensen, C. Rosenkilde, and N. Jensen, “Road safety and perceived
risk of cycle facilities in Copenhagen,” Presentation to AGM Eur.
Cyclists Federation, 2007, pp. 1–9.
[17] M. Graystone, R. Mitra, and P. M. Hess, “Gendered perceptions of
cycling safety and on-street bicycle infrastructure: Bridging the gap,”
Transp. Res. D, Transp. Environ., vol. 105, Apr. 2022, Art. no. 103237.
[18] V . D. Pyrialakou, C. Gkartzonikas, J. D. Gatlin, and K. Gkritza,
“Perceptions of safety on a shared road: Driving, cycling, or walking
near an autonomous vehicle,” J. Safety Res. , vol. 72, pp. 249–258,
Feb. 2020.
[19] A. Ng, A. K. Debnath, and K. C. Heesch, “Cyclist’ safety perceptions
of cycling infrastructure at un-signalised intersections: Cross-sectional
survey of Queensland cyclists,” J. Transp. Health, vol. 6, pp. 13–22,
Sep. 2017.
[20] J. Bosen, H. E. Fuchte, and C. Leicht-Scholten, “Cycling to work and
making cycling work: What makes committed utility cyclists despite
perceived risks of air pollution and traffic?” J. Transp. Health, vol. 28,
Jan. 2023, Art. no. 101519.
[21] P. Zeile, B. Resch, M. Loidl, A. Petutschnig, and L. Dörrzapf, “Urban
emotions and cycling experience-enriching traffic planning for cyclists
with human sensor data,” GI_Forum, vol. 2016, no. 1, pp. 16–204, 2016.
[22] J. Parkin, M. Wardman, and M. Page, “Models of perceived cycling
risk and route acceptability,” Accident Anal. Prevention, vol. 39, no. 2,
pp. 364–371, Mar. 2007.
[23] R. Manton, H. Rau, F. Fahy, J. Sheahan, and E. Clifford, “Using mental
mapping to unpack perceived cycling risk,” Accident Anal. Prevention,
vol. 88, pp. 138–149, Mar. 2016.
[24] R. von Stülpnagel and J. Krukar, “Risk perception during urban cycling:
An assessment of crowdsourced and authoritative data,” Accident Anal.
Prevention, vol. 121, pp. 109–117, Dec. 2018.
[25] R. von Stülpnagel and N. Binnig, “How safe do you feel?—A large-
scale survey concerning the subjective safety associated with different
kinds of cycling lanes,” Accident Anal. Prevention, vol. 167, Mar. 2022,
Art. no. 106577.
[26] S. Schmidt and R. von Stülpnagel, “Risk perception and gaze behavior
during urban cycling—A field study,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Workshop Eye
Tracking Spatial Res., 2018.
[27] A. Sorton and T. Walsh, “Bicycle stress level as a tool to evaluate urban
and suburban bicycle compatibility,” Transp. Res. Board, no. 1438, pp.
17–24, 1994.
[28] M. C. Mekuria, P. G. Furth, and H. Nixon, “Low-stress bicycling
and network connectivity,” Mineta Transp. Inst., Tech. Rep. CA-
MTI-12-1005, May 2012. [Online]. Available: https://transweb.sjsu.edu/
sites/default/files/1005-low-stress-bicycling-network-connectivity.pdf
[29] P. Furth, “Level of traffic stress criteria for road segments, version 2.0,”
Northeastern Univ. College Eng., Boston, MA, USA, Tech. Rep., 2017.
[30] K. Ito and F. Biljecki, “Assessing bikeability with street view imagery
and computer vision,” Transp. Res. C, Emerg. Technol., vol. 132,
Nov. 2021, Art. no. 103371.
[31] X. Li, C. Ratti, and I. Seiferling, “Quantifying the shade provision of
street trees in urban landscape: A case study in Boston, USA, using
Google street view,” Landscape Urban Planning, vol. 169, pp. 81–91,
Jan. 2018.
[32] A. Toikka, E. Willberg, V . Mäkinen, T. Toivonen, and J. Oksanen,
“The green view dataset for the capital of Finland, Helsinki,” Data Brief,
vol. 30, Jun. 2020, Art. no. 105601.
[33] A. Nouriani and L. Lemke, “Vision-based housing price estimation using
interior, exterior & satellite images,” Intell. Syst. with Appl., vol. 14,
May 2022, Art. no. 200081.
[34] N. Naik, J. Philipoom, R. Raskar, and C. Hidalgo,
“Streetscore—Predicting the perceived safety of one million
streetscapes,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
Workshops, Jun. 2014, pp. 793–799.
[35] A. Dubey, N. Naik, D. Parikh, R. Raskar, and C. A. Hidalgo, “Deep
learning the city: Quantifying urban perception at a global scale,”
in Proc. 14th Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ECCV), Amsterdam, The
Netherlands. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, Jan. 2016, pp. 196–212.
[36] D. Verma, A. Jana, and K. Ramamritham, “Predicting human perception
of the urban environment in a spatiotemporal urban setting using locally
acquired street view images and audio clips,”Building Environ., vol. 186,
Dec. 2020, Art. no. 107340.
[37] T. Ramírez, R. Hurtubia, H. Lobel, and T. Rossetti, “Measuring het-
erogeneous perception of urban space with massive data and machine
learning: An application to safety,”Landscape Urban Planning, vol. 208,
Apr. 2021, Art. no. 104002.
[38] W. Guan, Z. Chen, F. Feng, W. Liu, and L. Nie, “Urban perception:
Sensing cities via a deep interactive multi-task learning framework,”
ACM Trans. Multimedia Comput., Commun., Appl., vol. 17, no. 1s,
pp. 1–20, Jan. 2021.
[39] L. Najafizadeh and J. E. Froehlich, “A feasibility study of using Google
street view and computer vision to track the evolution of urban accessi-
bility,” in Proc. 20th Int. ACM SIGACCESS Conf. Comput. Accessibility,
Oct. 2018, pp. 340–342.
[40] M. Saha et al., “Project sidewalk: A web-based crowdsourcing tool for
collecting sidewalk accessibility data at scale,” in Proc. CHI Conf. Hum.
Factors Comput. Syst., May 2019, pp. 1–14.
[41] W. Song et al., “FARSA: Fully automated roadway safety assessment,”
in Proc. IEEE Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis. (WACV), Mar. 2018,
pp. 521–529.
[42] L. L. Thurstone, “A law of comparative judgment.,” Psychol. Rev.,
vol. 101, no. 2, pp. 266–270, 1994.
[43] R. A. Bradley and M. E. Terry, “Rank analysis of incomplete block
designs: I. The method of paired comparisons,” Biometrika, vol. 39,
nos. 3–4, pp. 324–345, 1952.
[44] H. Ding, J. Gao, Y . Yuan, and Q. Wang, “An end-to-end contrastive
license plate detector,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 25, no. 1,
pp. 503–516, Jan. 2024.
[45] A. Elo, The Rating of Chessplayers, Past and Present. New York, NY ,
USA: Arco Pub., 1978.
[46] R. Herbrich, T. Minka, and T. Graepel, “TrueSkillT: A Bayesian skill
rating system,” in Adv. Neural Inf. Process., vol. 19, 2006, pp. 569–576.
[47] S. L. Chau, M. Cucuringu, and D. Sejdinovic, “Spectral ranking
with covariates,” in Proc. Eur. Conf Mach. Learn. Knowl. Discovery
Databases, Grenoble, France. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, Sep. 2022,
pp. 70–86.
[48] L. Xu, J. Li, W. Lin, Y . Zhang, Y . Zhang, and Y . Yan, “Pairwise
comparison and rank learning for image quality assessment,” Displays,
vol. 44, pp. 21–26, Sep. 2016.
[49] L. Maystre, V . Kristof, and M. Grossglauser, “Pairwise comparisons with
flexible time-dynamics,” in Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl.
Discovery Data Mining, Jul. 2019, pp. 1236–1246.
[50] M. Engilberge, L. Chevallier, P. Pérez, and M. Cord, “SoDeep: A sorting
deep net to learn ranking loss surrogates,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2019, pp. 10784–10793.
[51] J. Dill and N. McNeil, “Revisiting the four types of cyclists: Findings
from a national survey,” Transp. Res. Rec., J. Transp. Res. Board,
vol. 2587, no. 1, pp. 90–99, Jan. 2016.
[52] R. Geller, “Four types of cyclists,” Portland Bur. Transp., Portland, OR,
USA, Tech. Rep., 2006.
[53] M. Perez-Ortiz and R. K. Mantiuk, “A practical guide and software for
analysing pairwise comparison experiments,” 2017, arXiv:1712.03686.
[54] Y . Yuan, X. Chen, X. Chen, and J. Wang, “Segmentation transformer:
Object-contextual representations for semantic segmentation,” 2019,
arXiv:1909.11065.
[55] S. Chopra, R. Hadsell, and Y . LeCun, “Learning a similarity metric
discriminatively, with application to face verification,” in Proc. IEEE
Comput. Soc. Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2005,
pp. 539–546.
[56] A. Paszke et al., “PyTorch: An imperative style, high-performance
deep learning library,” in Proc. NIPS, H. Wallach, H. Larochelle,
A. Beygelzimer, F. d’Alché Buc, E. Fox, and R. Garnett, Eds. Red Hook,
NY , USA: Curran Associates, Dec. 2019, pp. 8024–8035.
[57] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,”
2014, arXiv:1412.6980.
[58] R. Dittrich, B. Francis, R. Hatzinger, and W. Katzenbeisser, “A paired
comparison approach for the analysis of sets of likert-scale responses,”
Stat. Model., vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 3–28, Apr. 2007.
[59] S. Negahban, S. Oh, and D. Shah, “Iterative ranking from pair-wise
comparisons,” in Proc. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 25, Dec. 2012,
pp. 2474–2482.
[60] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton, “ImageNet classification
with deep convolutional neural networks,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
Process., vol. 25. Red Hook, NY , USA: Curran Associates, 2012.
[61] K. Simonyan and A. Zisserman, “Very deep convolutional networks for
large-scale image recognition,” 2014, arXiv:1409.1556.
Authorized licensed use limited to: National University of Singapore. Downloaded on June 24,2025 at 09:17:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 1700 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 26, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025
[62] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for image
recognition,” 2015, arXiv:1512.03385.
[63] P. V . Rao and L. L. Kupper, “Ties in paired-comparison experiments:
A generalization of the bradley-terry model,” J. Amer. Stat. Assoc.,
vol. 62, no. 317, p. 194, Mar. 1967.
[64] M. Winters et al., “Safe cycling: How do risk perceptions compare with
observed risk?” Can. J. Public Health, vol. 103, no. S3, pp. S42–S47,
Nov. 2012.
[65] R. von Stülpnagel, C. Petinaud, and S. Lißner, “Crash risk and subjective
risk perception during urban cycling: Accounting for cycling volume,”
Accident Anal. Prevention, vol. 164, Jan. 2022, Art. no. 106470.
Miguel Costa received the M.Sc. degree in electrical and computer engi-
neering from the Instituto Superior Técnico (IST), University of Lisbon, and
the Ph.D. degree in transportation systems from the University of Lisbon in
2024. He is a Post-Doctoral Researcher with the Department of Technology,
Management, and Economics, Technical University of Denmark (DTU). His
research focuses on understanding and predicting how cyclists’ objective
and subjective safety is influenced by the context, where cyclists cycle and
the surrounding built environment and how to use reinforcement learning
for finding optimal climate adaptation policies by integrating dynamic links
between flooding events, transport, health, and wellbeing.
Manuel Marques received the Ph.D. degree in electrical and computer
engineering from IST in 2011. He is a Researcher with the Electrical and
Computer Engineering Department, IST, and the Instituto de Sistemas e
Robótica, LARSyS. His main area of research is computer vision, with a
special interest in 3-D reconstruction, video processing object recognition,
and pose estimation. Recently, he focused on applications to assistive robotics
and transportation, in particular cycling mobility.
Carlos Lima Azevedo received the B.Sc. degree in structural engineering and
the M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees from the University of Lisbon, in 2004, 2008,
and 2014, respectively. He is an Associate Professor with the Department
of Technology, Management, and Economics, DTU; and a Research Affiliate
of ITSLab, Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT). He is an expert
in the development of new models and simulation techniques for smart
mobility design and assessment, which includes developing and applying
large-scale agent-based urban simulation for the design and evaluation of
shared automated vehicles on-demand and personalized real-time incentive
systems; individual behavior experiments and preferences modeling toward
new mobility solutions and innovative road safety assessment models.
Felix Wilhelm Siebert received the Ph.D. degree in transport psychology.
He is an Assistant Professor with the Human Behavior Section, Department
of Technology, Management, and Economics, DTU. His main research interest
is the safety-related behavior of vulnerable road users. In current work,
he applies computer vision approaches to video data for the automated
detection of safety-related behavior of road users.
Filipe Moura is an Associate Professor with Habilitation in transportation
with the Department of Civil Engineering and Architecture, IST. He is the
Head of the U-Shift Laboratory, Transport Systems Research Group, CERIS.
He is distinguished as a Fulbright Scholar. His main research expertise is
on urban mobility, focusing on analyzing travel behavior, transport modeling,
and sustainable mobility. His endeavors emphasize active modes and their
interactions within the urban environment and explore autonomy within urban
mobility (from both behavioral and technological perspectives).
Authorized licensed use limited to: National University of Singapore. Downloaded on June 24,2025 at 09:17:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 